TEN

342

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

SECTION TEN

HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS
A DEEPER EXPLORATION

The Rave I'Ching, completed in December 1989 by Ra Uru Hu, is a synthesis of the descriptions
for each Hexagram (Gate), a list of the Incarnation Crosses associated with it, and a description
of the 6 lines associated with each Gate. There are 64 hexagrams and 384 lines in the Rave
I'Ching. For the purposes of this book this section lists only the 384 lines. For a copy of the Rave
I'Ching please visit one of the authorized Human Design National Organizations; a listing can
be found in Section Eleven.
375 of the Lines express a polarity of potential experiences, which is termed either an exaltation or a
detriment, and is indicated by the black triangle symbol ... (exaltation) or the white triangle symbol V
(detriment).These terms when used in standard astrology indicate good (exaltation) and bad (detriment),
but The Human Design System does not make this moral distinction. In Human Design, these terms
simply denote the 'this' and 'that' polarity.
A person's design is the sum of its parts, and when looking at a specific component such as a line,
we need to consider it in relationship to the entire chart. If you pull just one detail out to examine
it, without considering the whole of the rest of the design including type, strategy, authority,
profile, cross, centers, channels and gates, you take it out of context. To truly understand a line,
always step back and see it in the context of the bigger picture; the holistic view. What you will
find as you begin to study charts is that there is a "genetic continuity," an unfolding pattern. The
pieces have a theme that relate back to the full design, and you begin to see a theme for the life.
You also begin to see the paradox in the life, and all of its complexities.
It takes time to understand lines; they may seem abstract, or like riddles or poetry. Just as the
I'Ching (Chinese Book of Changes) can take a lifetime to understand, the lines take time to
digest in the context of the entire chart. It's best to start with your own chart and spend time
with, even meditate on, your own lines over time. Even the recognitions that you may have in
the moment about a line, or the way the description resonates in you, will evolve as you journey
deeper and deeper into your own experiment with living your design.
You will find your lines next to your gates in the red (Design) and black (Personality) columns on
your chart, e.g., Gate 50.1 is Gate 50 Line 1. Look for your lines by Gate in this section, and read both
descriptions (exaltation and detriment) to get a sense of the meaning of the lines in your design. Pay
attention to both the name of the line and the description, as each contain valuable information about
the line. Additionally, the description for Line 1 in each Hexagram will give you the foundational
understanding of that specific Gate.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LiNE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

343

Some lines, not all, have a one-sentence introductory description in italics. When there is a
description in italics it means that this is a theme you have an opportunity to learn about and
potentially grow into. If there is no description in italics, then this characteristic is a given; it's
hard wired into your design.
Within the exaltation and detriment descriptions, the first sentence in regular type is the original
meaning as received by Ra. The second sentence in bold is a subsequent description that Ra
synthesized years later to further clarifY the meaning of the lines. You will also see that there are
planet glyphs associated with the lines - they are listed next to them. Certain planets can "fix" a
line in either exaltation or detriment. If you look at your own chart, you will see that there are
exaltations and detriments displayed next to some of the Gates and lines. In some cases, you may
find a chart that has no fixing - no exaltation or detriment.
When we speak of exaltation and detriment in the context of "fixing" in a chart this is simply
another way of saying "this" and "that". There is no judgment here of good or bad. The detriments
in your design are also perfect for you in the continuity ofyour overall design. In fact, it is generally
in the detriments that we have the greatest opportunity to learn. Composite charts (your design
combined with another) and transits (planets moving through our designs over time) can also fix
our lines. There is also fixing that can take place through the harmonic gate at the other end of
a channel. These areas are complex and best suited for an advanced discussion at another time.
Start by looking up each of your Gates and Lines in this section. Then read the description
line in italics if there is one and contemplate the lesson that you are here to learn. Read the
line descriptions themselves and feel the flow of energy that moves from the exaltation to the
detriment. See what recognitions you have. If you have an exaltation in your chart then read the
exalted line knowing that this energy will be emphasized in your design. If you have a detriment
then read the detriment for its emphasis in your design. If you have a juxtaposition (a star shaped
symbol representing both the exaltation and detriment), then both descriptions apply.
PLANET GLYPHS & SYMBOLS IN THE RAVE I'CHING

0
E9

Sun

1)

Saturn

Earth

It'

Uranus

J)

Moon

~

Neptune

~

Mercury

'¥'

Pluto

~

Venus

~

Exaltation

(f'

Mars

V

Detriment

:It.

Jupiter

•

Juxtaposition

344

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 1: THE CREATIVE - SELF EXPRESSION
- Creation as a primal force. The energy potential to manifest inspiration without limitation-

Line 6 - Objectivity
Clear assessment of creative value. Clarity in creative expression.

The risk that subjective appraisal will result in disappointment and creative frustration.
Subjectivity in self-expression that may lead to creative frustration.
Line 5 - The energy to attract society
Mars exalted for its powerful ego endurance. The power and drive to stay with the creative
process.
Uranus in detriment, where eccentricity can handicap endurance. Eccentricity that
though attractive will limit the drive.
Line 4 - Aloneness as the medium of creativity
The tension ofinner light.
The Earth exalted as the symbol of personal perspective manifested outside of influence,
where the potential magic of inspiration is diluted. Creativity that must develop outside
of influence.
Where the potential magic of inspiration is diluted. The need to influence that abandons
aloneness and limits creativity.
Line 3 - The energy to sustain creative work
Mars exalted as the symbol of the profound need for self-expression. The deep need for
self-expression.
Material forces can disrupt creativity and lead to over-ambition. Materialism disrupts
creativity.
Line 2 - Love is light
~ .A. Venus exalted as a symbol of beauty. The required harmony between established values
and ideals that enriches inspiration. Self-expression conditioned by ideals and values.
(f' V Desires and passions have their place but not at the expense of Creation. Self-expression
limited by desires and passions.

:D
JtI

Line 1 - Creation is independent ofwill
.A. The Moon exalted as a symbol of adaption. Time is everything. Self-expression which
has its special timing.
V Instability leads to distortion. Here, patience is a virtue and revolution a vice. Creative
instability unless there is patience.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A DEEPER EXPLORATION

345

GATE 2: THE RECEPTIVE - THE DIRECTION OF THE SELF
- Receptivity as the primal base through which any response is determined. The root ofaction -

Line 6 - Fixation
Unable or unwilling to see the whole picture.
!f ... With Mercury exalted, less negative, though the intellect becomes absorbed in constant
rationalization. Higher knowing that is extremely narrow in its receptivity.
1) \l The need for security may distort awareness to its ultimate perversion, destructiveness.
The Higher Self absorbed with the mundane and the need for security.
Line 5 - Intelligent application

!f

... The strategist with Mercury exalted. Reasoned management of resources. Higher

knowing as a gift for strategy.
ij) \l The inability to share responsibility or recognize the abilities of others. Higher knowing
as an exclusively individual and selfish process.

~

0'

Line 4 - Secretiveness
More than modesty, the ability to preserve harmony through discretion.
... The higher goal transcends personal acclaim. The team player, acknowledged as the
leader but never the captain. Where higher knowing does not have to be expressed to be
recognized.
\l Loose lips sink ships. The unquenchable fire of the ego engenders enmity. The inability
to keep silent when the opportunity arises for expression.
Line 3 - Patience
The teacher that never stops being a student.
Dedication to a lifetime of receptivity with the maturity to accept that the process never
ends. When connected permanently to Gate 14 through the Beat Channel, rewards for
services rendered. The recognition that receptivity is a lifelong process.
For the revolutionary, patience is a vice. Higher knowing that cannot wait and demands
expression.
Line 2 - Genius
Unconscious and unlearnable alignment a/stimulus and response. The natural.
The inner strength to focus and realize. A natural gift for unlearnable knowing.
Genius as madness. Knowledge exclusively as power for the enhancement of the ego. The
delusion that knowledge is power.
Line 1 - Intuition
Semiti·vity to disharmony and atrophy.

~

0'

... The importance of aesthetics whether inborn or acquired. Higher knowing through
aesthetics.
\l The assertion of ego in spite of wisdom. The urge for action that will ignore the wisdom
of the Higher Self.

346

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

-----

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 3: DIFFICULTV AT THE BEGINNING - ORDERING
- The fundamental challenge ofinitiation is to transcend confusion and establish order-

o ...

m

Line 5 - Victimization
When actions designed to overcome confusion alienate others.
The courage to stand by one's convictions. The unique energy of individuality to
withstand confusion.
V The Earth in detriment, where victimization leads to appeasement and suffering.
Confused energy which is dominated by the ordering power of others.

cJ' V

'J
'¥!

Line 6 - Surrender
7he ultimate maturity to recognize when struggle isfutile.
As its light sustains, so life goes on. The innate acceptance that ordering is a process, not
a problem.
As darkness overwhelms, life can seem worthless leading to depression and the sense of
hopelessness. The overwhelming power of confused energy can lead to depression.

Line 4 - Charisma
Innate quality which attracts valuedguidance.
Physic attunement that magnetizes nurturing. A psychic energy which attracts nourishment
and ensures ordering.
Mars in detriment, where the demands of ego lead to rejection. Confused energy that
needs nourishment but is generally rejected.

Line 3 - Survival
7he ability to recognize and distinguish between fertile and sterile m their varwus
manifestations.
... In reproduction, the ability to choose the best mate. An innate knowing of what is
sterile and what is fertile where the mutation is specifically biological and dependent on
collaboration with others.
V The perverse denial ofevolutionary standards. An innate contrariness which refuses to mutate.
Line 2 - Immaturity
7he unrestrained acceptance ofguidance.
The unrelenting energy for growth will eventually triumph. The energy and potential for
individual mutation.
Internal instability which both accepts and rejects authority simultaneously. Energy and
potential that is conditioned by others leading to instability.
Line 1 - SyntheSiS
Difficulties can be only overcome when all the pertinentfactors have been analyzed.
The understanding that confusion is natural and must always exist before clarity can be
achieved. An innate knowing that order will emerge from confusion.
V The reliance on intellect at the expense of intuition can lead to unnecessary frustration.
The inability to know that order will emerge and the drive to find this knowing elsewhere.

m ...
If

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

------

347

GATE 4: YOUTHFUL FOLLY - FORMULIZATION

-The energy to beguile and succeed despite ignorance. Freedom from retributionLine 6 - Excess
Repeated and conscious abuse ofnorms will not escape discipline.
If ... The development through experience of techniques to apply self-restraint. The potential
in a logical process to recognize when the understanding is not complete and have the
patience to wait out the process.
0' \J The gall to accept punishment as the price ofexcess. Despite recognizing the incompleteness
a lack ofpatience with the process.
Line 5 - Seduction
Allowing others to assume responsibility as a shield againstpotentialpunishment.
Unearned reward and recognition. The potential to succeed through the understanding
of others.
A life of lip service to antiquated and unsatisfYing values. Cynicism. The potential for
cynicism that comes with always having to acknowledge the understanding of others.
Line 4 - The liar
Roleplaying as an artform. The actor.
Fantasy protects and nurtures a sense of purpose and reason no matter how misguided.
The potential to find or illustrate the formulas through fantasy.
Time always brings humiliation. The potential danger to see the fantasy as fact.

Cf

'¥!

Line 3 - Irresponsibility
The general refusal to apply oneselfdiligently when one can get by with much less effort.
... Where art is more valued then the artist. The potential to enjoy the formulas with no
regard to their practical application.
\J The rationalization of irresponsibility as an act of refocalization. The potential to justifY
such a process in order to maintain it.

Line 2 - Acceptance
The recognition oflimitation in oneself and others leads to tolerance and the suspension of
judgment.
:D ... The glorification of feelings. The mother which always pardons the errant child. The
potential to recognize that not everyone can understand.
0' \J The assertion of the ego at the expense of others' failures. The potential to take advantage
of the lack of understanding in others.
Line 1 - Pleasure

Ultimate pleasure cannot be achieved withoutperfect timing.

:D ... The instinct to know the right moment and circumstances where pleasure is rewarded

m

and not punished. The potential to recognize that there is a natural timing to the
understanding process.
\J Timing is not a product of discipline. Exaggerated self-discipline leads to the abuse of
pleasure. The potential to recognize but the urge to force the timing.

348

T_H_E_D_EFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 5: WAITING - FIXED PATTERNS
- Fundamental attunement to natural rhythms. Waiting as an active state of awareness-

\f!

f:.l-

'¥'

o
\f!
J)

f:.l-

'¥'

Line 6 - Yielding
Waiting is never free from pressure, physical or mental and is often punctuated by the
unexpected.
A The growth of awareness that comes with bending to the universal flow. Accepting that in
one's fixed rhythm despite the pressures, growth will be empowered, and often through
the unexpected. 0 polarity.
\l There is no planet in detriment; each in its way, given the power of this position, will yield
to the inevitable. No planet in detriment.
Line 5 -Joy
Waiting as an aspect ofenlightenment.
A To remain calm as the ultimate aesthetic and thus recognize the inner meaning of being.
The power to be calm and to find one's place in the flow.
\l Joy dismissed as an illusion, waiting as a failure. Disillusionment with recognizing one's
place in the flow.
Line 4 -The hunter
Waiting as a guarantee ofsurvival.
The creative genius to transform the most passive experience into active achievement.
The power to make the best of one's fixed rhythm.
\l The vanity of a personality so strong that unwilling to hide behind a blind, threatens its
very survival. The drive to deny one's own rhythms with predictable costs.
Line 3 - Compulsiveness
Thefear engendered by the sense ofhelplessness resulting in unnecessary stress and activity.
A Compulsiveness can be limited in its negative effect through flights of imagination.
Though still stressful, they do not lead to action. A surrender to the limitations of a fixed
rhythm through the empowerment of the imagination.
\l The Moon cannnot stand still. Unable to surrender and at odds with one's own rhythm.
Line 2 - Inner peace
The ability to ignore the temptation to take premature action.
A rThe gift of maintaining composure through idealizing tranquility. The power to be
comfortable with one's rhythm.
\l Inner peace experienced as stagnation. The drive for power that is constrained by the
fixed rhythm.
Line 1 - Perseverance

Ifthe captain must, he goes down with the ship.
Courage in the face of adversity. The power to maintain one's own rhythm.
The premature and often disastrous urge to cut one's losses. Weakness in maintaining
one's rhythm when challenged.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS,

A DE_E_P_E_R_E_X_P_L_O_R_A_T_IO_N

349

GATE 6: CONFLICT - FRICTION

- The fundamental design component ofprogress. The law that growth cannot exist without fiiction Line 6 -The peacemaker
The discipline and integrity ofa superiorforce to unilaterally cease conflict to permit surrender
and survival ofitsfoe.
... The highest form of reason is that life is sacred. The emotional power to end conflict
tempered by feelings and sensitivity to others.
\l The peacemaker whose actions are just but whose terms are unacceptable. The emotional
power to end conflict but only after one's conditions have been satisfied.

J)

Line 5 - Arbitration
The faith derived from analytical diligence and emotional control that permits a higher
authority tojudge a conflict.
... Harmony furthered through the avoidance of direct conflict. Sensitivity to conflict can
lead to the avoidance of intimacy.
\l Where a party to arbitration sees itself as the best possible judge and will only accept
judgement if it is the victor. Insensitivity to the concerns of others in a conflict.

o ...

Line 4 - Triumph
A position on natural and unchallengeable power.
The charity and wisdom that must come with victory and the movement towards new
horizons. The power of emotions to dominate a relationship.
The conqueror and purger. The lack ofemotional control that is destructive in relationships.
Line 3 - Allegiance
The ability to secure support and create strength out ofa weak position. When connected to the
harmonic Gate 59, mating that results in conception.
The destruction of old forms through union; either mundane, as above, sexual union, or
exalted as universalization. The depth offeelings that can enrich union and intimacy.
The rejection of allegiance as submission to established order. Sensitivity to controls
which may eventually reject intimacy.

Line 2 -The guerilla
The ability to maximize an inferiorposition through timely contact and withdrawal.
~ ... Aesthetic sensitivity and mental detail can find the weakest point. The sensitivity to find
the weakest point in a conflict and to exploit it emotionally.
d' \l The kamikaze, striking but moot. A lack of sensitivity that blunders into conflicts.
Line 1 - Retreat
The realization that wasting one's resources against overwhelming odds is not courage but
folly.
'¥! ... The power of regeneration that can embrace retreat as a phase and not a failure. The
emotional stability to accept conflict.
~ \l The inferiority complex, where retreat is experienced as personal weakness. Emotional
instability in times of conflict.

T_H_E_D_E_F_1N_IT_'V_E_B
_O
__O_K_O_F_H_U_M_A_N_D_E_S_IG_N
__
T_H_E_S_C_I~E_NC_E_O_F_D_I_F_FE_R_E_N_T_IA_T_'_ON

350

GATE 7: THE ARMY - THE ROLE OF THE SELF IN INTERACTION

-The point of convergence. By design, the need for leadership to guide and order society-

If

JoI

Line 6 - The administrator
7he ability to share andjustly apportion power.
A The power to communicate the frameworks of responsibility. The capacity of the Self
through its role to communicate responsibility.
\l The bureaucrat whose lust for power eventually destabilizes the organization. The role of
the Self to seek power through the communication of responsibility.
Line 5 -The general
Leadership whose authority must be absolute and is sanctioned by society in times ofC1'isis.

fl- A The gift of attracting loyalty necessary in harmonizing the potential of society. The
capacity of the Self through its role to attract loyalty.

\f \l The commander isolated from his troops and obsessed with victory at any price. The lack
ofloyalty when the Self insists on isolation.

o A

Line 4 -The abdicator
7he willingness to accept thejudgment ofthe people and/or the rule oflaw.
The grace and wisdom to step down for the benefit of the whole. The capacity of the Self
to accept the judgment of others.
One who must be forced from power by overwhelming opposition. The refusal of the Self
to accept the judgement of others.

Line 3 - The anarchist
7he rejection ofany institutionalized order.
}) A The constant need for change no matter what the prevailing conditions. The drive of the
Self to express many roles.
If \l The nihilist. The capacity of the Self to deny value in any role.
Line 2 - The democrat
7he ability to lead by serving the will ofthe majority.
\f A The application of universally accepted systems. When connected through the Alpha
Channel to Gate 31 Influence, the potential for Widespread and revolutionary effect on
society. The capacity of the Self to lead when chosen.
If \l Elitism and denegation by democrats of democracy. The capacity of the Selfonce chosen
to feel superior to those who chose them.
Line 1 - Authoritarian
7he iron hand both enlightened and despotic.
.... Venus exalted, as in the basic values and rules imposed on a child. The capacity of the Self
to guide with authority.
\l The distorted intellect that believes only it knows best. The capacity of the Self to insist
that its authority is best.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

351

GATE 8: HOLDING TOGETHER - CONTRIBUTION

- The basic worth realized in contributing individual efforts to group goals -

~

'¥'

11-

o

11~

Line 6 - Communion
The certainty which grows out ofharmony.
... 1he awareness of patterns that ensures correct timing. The gift of knowing when to
contribute creatively.
\l Doubt, which may engender regret even in the most ideal circumstances. Uncertainty in
timing and regret despite circumstances.
Line 5 - Dharma
Holding together does not exclude eventual separation. Successful union, after a proper term
will encourage separation. The fledgling once mature is expected to leave the nest. This is right
action which does not harm the integrity ofthe union.
... The teacher. Contribution as part of a process of sharing that accepts and expects
limitation, exemplified in teaching.
\l The parent that cannot let go of the child, understanding only, that its authority is being
challenged. Contribution as an end in itself that neither accepts nor expects limitation,
exemplified by the parent that cannot let go of the child.
Line 4 - Respect
The gift ofnaturally recognizing the contributions ofothers and particularly, the
acknowledgement ofthose who lead by example.
... The un-compromizing drive to assimilate. The drive to contribute and be an example to
and for others.
\l In a group where limitation is transcended, reason alone cannot predict individual worth.
As an example, the acknowledged leader of an athletic team is not necessarily the most
talented. A gift for contribution that is not conditioned by limitations.

Line 3 - The phoney
The acceptance ofthe style and not the substance of communal actions.
J) ... The perfected and rarely detected superficial intimacy. The example as an expression
through style, not substance.
1) \l A shallowness that underestimates others and overestimates its own ability to continue
its deception without detection. An overreliance and unfounded confidence in style.
Line 2 - Service

o ... The highest good, to serve selflessly. The potential to be an example through tmselfish expression.

ED \l The earth in detriment, where reward is a prerequisite of service. The willingness to be an
example for a price.

Line 1 - Honesty
The truthful acceptance oflimitation and re-cognition that it can only be transcended through
sharing.
If ... The awareness that the whole is always greater than the sum of its parts. Knowing that
creative expression must be honestly communicated and shared.
~ \l Withdrawal. The fear oflosing individuality in a group environment. The design to share
creativity at the expense ofindividuality.

352

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 9: THE TAMING POWER OF THE SMALL - ENERGY FOR DETAIL

- Potential can be fulfilled through detailed attention to all pertinent aspects -

J)

'¥J

Line 6 - Gratitude
The joy which comes with accepting small rewardsfor small victories.
... The Moon exalted, where the power of the small nourishes right perspective. The power
to enjoy the concentrating process.
\J No single step is of value until the journey is over. 1he energy for expression that cannot
find joy in the process until it is complete.
Line 5 - Faith
The trust that detailed adherence will lead tofulfillment.
Loyalty to the letter of the law. The power to focus and bring value to concentration.
Like the mystery of God, doubt engendered through the perceived illogic of a process.
Where the lack of power to concentrate leads to doubt.

J)

0'

o

Line 4 - Dedication
Regardless ofthe pressures or stress the disciplined attention to detail.
... Right action that leads inevitably to actualization. The power to act on the potential of
the focus.
\J The persistent urge to want to skip essential steps. The drive for action that ignores the
details.
Line 3 - The straw that breaks the camel's back
The overlooked minor element that always predeterminesfailure.
The use of force to temporarily overcome impediments. The loss of power through the
failure to focus.
\J Persistent force that saps vitality and turns molehills into mountains. The power to turn
a focus into an obsession.
Line 2 - Misery loves company
Collaboration with others to temper frustration. The power to collaborate with others in
focusing.
The overwhelming need for expansion can lead to errors in judgment, missed opportunities
and depression. The drive to collaborate that will miss the focus.
Line 1 - Sensibility
A balanced and responsible approach to problem solving.
The ability to avoid frustration through the creation of new forms. The power in focusing
to create new forms.
Mter a hasty and frustrating search the urge to kick in the door when the key is in your
pocket. The power to generate that will lose its focus.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - =353
=

DEEPER EXPLORATION

GATE 10: TREADING - THE BEHAVIOR OF THE SELF

-The underlying code of behavior which ensures successful interaction despite circumstances Line 6 -The role model
The perfect expression ofthe norms through action rather than words.
The constant example that refocuses the complacent on the basic integrity of set behavior.
The enduring value of the expression of the Self through action rather than words.
The hypocrite. Do as I say, not as I do. Behavior restricted to words rather than action.
Line 5 - The heretic
Direct and overt challenge to norms.
The ability to succeed through the understanding and expression of higher principles.
Principled behavior which directly challenges tradition.
The burning at the stake. Behavior which directly challenges behavior and is eventually
punished.

't>I
If

Line 4 -The opportunist
The acceptance of norms until a successful transformation can be engendered.
... Transformation that is transcendence to a higher code. The maintaining of behavioral
patterns until the right moment and opportunity for transformation.
V Opportunism as a game and/or mental exercise. Altering one's behavioral patterns in
order to take advantage of opportunities.
Line 3 -The martyr
Thefutile rejection ofstandards based on ajust awareness.
The martyr as an enduring example whose behavior is ultimately enshrined. Behavior
that is ultimately challenged by others.
V The martyr complex. The active pursuit of martyrdom for personal aggrandizement.
Behavior as a way to attract attention.

m ...
J)

If
0'

Line 2 -The hermit
The successful sidestepping ofbehavioral requirements through isolation.
... Mercury exalted, where mental functions enrich aloneness. Independent behavior through
isolation.
V The angry exile. Isolation to preserve independent behavior in the face ofconditioning.
Line 1 - Modesty
An innate sense to know and accept one'splace.
A valued sense of purpose no matter what the position. The ability to know one's place
and how to act despite circumstances.
V The affliction ofover-sensitivity and hurt feeling. Over-sensitivity to external conditioning
of behavior.

o ...
J)

354

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 11: PEACE - IDEAS

- A harmonic condition in the individual society that permits assessment before renewed action Line 6 - Adaptability
The inner balance to accept transition.
The innate awareness that all forms are transitory. The realization that ideas lead to
change and are changeable.
Adaptability in its most negative manifestation. The speculator who profits at the expense
of others in times of peace or war. The realization ofwhat idea is ofvalue in any situation.
J)

J)

o
'¥!
ct.

Line 5 -The philanthropist
... The motiveless nurturing of the disenfranchised to ensure harmony. Philosophic and
humanitarian ideas.
'V The withdrawing from direct contact, where giving is a form of defence. Giving away
ideas out of a sense ofinsecurity.
Line 4 - The teacher
The ability to express the essential nature ofpeace.
... The sage, that in the extreme, can teach harmony to the tone deaf Venus is also exalted.The
ability to reach out and attract the alienated. Concepts which are clear and transferable.
Ideas which can attract and inform the uneducated.
'V The Guru, whose most valued wisdom is intentionally limited to a few. Ideas which can
only be grasped by the few.
Line 3 -The realist
The acknowledgment thatpeace is transitory.
... The internal renewal to maintain strength and alertness. The realization that ideas come
and go.
'V The tendency to appreciate harmony to the point of delusion. The belief that beauty is
eternal. Fiddling while Rome burns. A pleasure in ideas that have no real application.
Line 2 - Rigor
The recognition that without vigilance and risk, peace can lead to stagnation and collapse.
The imagination applied to ensuring the understanding of achieved values. A sense of
boredom overcome through the imagination.
The resorting to factionalism to satisfY the ego's need for action. Provoking with ideas to
escape boredom.

J)

0'

Line 1 - Attunement
The serendipity ofbeing in the rightplace at the right time.
... The nourishment derived from being with those who share the same goals and aspirations.
The gift offinding those who will value your ideas.
'V The fear of anonymity. The sense that no one will value their ideas.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

355

12: STANDSTILL - CAUTION
- The quality ofrestraint and the importance ofmeditation and inaction in confronting temptation GATE

Line 6 - Metamorphosis
Faith in, and energy applied towards change and the emergencefrom standstill.
Creative transcendence that when connected to the Harmonic Gate 22, through the
channel of Openness, leads to successful mutation and the emergence of a new social
form. The capacity to mutate and express new social forms.
A retrograde metamorphosis that has evolved a perfected adaption to standstill. The
perfected adaption to caution that can accept social limitations.
Line 5 - The pragmatist
7he success ofrestraint lies in not abandoning the lessons learnt when the phase ends.
Light is always conscious of darkness. Caution as an expression of social experience.
The tendency to remember only the most painful lessons learnt. Caution which is
conditioned by the most painful social experiences.

ID
!f

Line 4 -The prophet
7he ability toforesee andplanfor the end ofstandstill.
• The rousing of the stagnant for communal preparation. The ability to foresee and express
the need for social interaction and an end to caution.
V The voice in the wilderness. The expressed need for social interaction that falls on deafears.
Line 3 - Confession
7he process ofseif-analysis.
The recognition of inadequacies and the purging of unjustified vanities. The expression of
inadequacies in social interaction that leads to self-analysis and caution.
A perverse and often exaggerated self-hatred. Inadequacies in social interaction that lead
to the expression of self-hatred.
Line 2 - Purification
Rigorous withdrawalfrom negative influences.
The discipline to maintain a pure state. The expression ofdisciplined social caution.
The boredom that arises out oflack of stimulation. Caution that manifests boredom and
the expressed desire for stimulus.

'/-

11-

Line 1 -The monk
Withdrawal that can only be maintained with communal support.
• The beauty and harmony possible beyond the reach of temptation. The expression of
social withdrawal and its value when supported by others.
V Simon the Stylite, total and often absurd withdrawal. The absurd expression of social
caution and extreme withdrawal from emotional contact.

356

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

-------

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

13: THE FELLOWSHIP OF MAN - THE LISTENER
- Universal ideas and values in an ordered framework which inspires humanistic cooperationGATE

Line 6 - The optimist
The ability to accept any limited interaction as a necessary step towards greater union.
The energy to persevere. Unlimited hope.The hope that openness will lead to betterre1ationships.
aivete. The translation of mutual interest into universality. The belief that mutual
interests can be projected on others.
Line 5 - The saviour
The ability to overcome all obstaclesfor the betterment ofhumanity.
The charismatic genius who can find a role for everyone. The listener that has a gift for
finding a role for others.
The able administrator. Given the extreme positive nature of this position, mundane
application is rare. The listener whose gift for finding a role for others is practical and
suited to administration.

'¥!
~

ffi
~

:D

o

Line 4 - Fatigue
The point of exhaustion eventually reached when one is too tired tofight.
... The renaissance that comes with truce and its eventual reinvigoration. Openness which
leads to exhaustion and the need for silence.
\! Emotional exhaustion. Appeasement and withdrawal. A role where openness is a vulnerability.
Line 3 - Pessimism
The beliefthat what is best can never be achieved.
... A lack of trust that can only be transformed through concrete evidence. Openness that is
conditioned by suspicion and seeks evidence.
\! Pessimism exalted to an art form, where as art, it may have the opposite effect. Satire.
Where the rightness of suspicion can inspire satire.
Line 2 - Bigotry
The risk, always present, thatfellowship can only existfor a particular type, whether racial,
religious, national or intellectual.
... Tolerance as the least offensive manifestation of bigotry. A role of openness through
tolerance.
\! The obsessive belief that the highest ideals cannot be embraced by the lowest forms.
An extremely difficult position, where even the highest ideals provide rationalization for
hatred. A role of openness so narrow that there is practically no one worth listening to.
Line 1 - Empathy
The ability to relate and commune with everyone with equanimity.
... Harmony through affection. A role of openness in listening to others with affection.
\! The politician kissing babies. An openness that is never free of motives.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

357

GATE 14: POSSESSION IN GREAT MEASURE - POWER SKILLS
- The accumulation & retention ofpower through skilled interaction, coupling grace with control-

Line6-Humilty
Wealth andpoweI' at its most exalted.
The enlightened recognition that material success is God's will. Spirituality as the key to
acceptance and the source of power.
All manifestations of this position are essentially positive. The Earth represents the
existentialist recognition that material success was unavoidable and the humility
engendered by such serendipity. Existentialism as the key to acceptance and the source
of power.
Line 5 - Arrogance
The everpresent risk inherent in positions ofpower.
Innate dignity. Innate dignity that is a key to power.
A dissatisfaction with the gifts of others that creates feelings of superiority. Innate
recognition of those without power fueling the illusion of superiority.
Line 4 - Security
The concentration on establishing a strongfoundation.
J) A Protection from assault. The key to power lies in developing skills to ensure a strong
foundation.
(J' \l Overconfidence in meeting the challenge of competition that may threaten the very basis
of security. Without the proper skills the inability to guarantee security.
Line 3 - Service
The utilization oftalent and wealthfor the highestgood.
Selfless contribution to society. The key to power lies in selfless contribution to others.
Greed and the self-destruction of moral fibre. The power of selfishness to fuel greed.
Line 2 - Management
The wisdom that investing in expertise brings rewards.
Expansion. The ability to delegate responsibility. The key to power lies in not trying to be
and to do everything alone.
The vanity to be one's own best expert. The key to power is doing everything individually.
Line 1 - Money isn't everything
The recognition that wealth has its own problems.
)t. A The lust for lucre tempered by higher principles. The key to manifesting power is higher
principles.
!f \l The delusion that you can throw money at problems. Energy alone can never be the key.

358

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 15: MODESTY - EXTREMES
- The quality of behavior which expresses the proper balance between extremes -

'¥!
~

Line 6 - Self-defense
Modesty that is never confused with weakness.
... Constant re-examination to weed out the weakest aspect. The power of the Self in
exploring the extremes to find the weakest point.
V A tendency to use harmony as a weapon in problem situations rather than focusing on
the root causes. The power of the Self to ignore the weakest point in favour of harmony.
Line 5 - Sensitivity
The ability to sense when otherwise balanced behavior must be adjusted to meet the
requirements ofchanging environment.
The power to grow. The capacity of the Self to grow through experiencing the extremes.
The tendency to overcompensate. The drive of the Self to overcompensate and disturb
the flow.
Line 4 - The wallflower
Modesty as a shield against exposure ofinadequacy.
A genuine form that may/or may not mask inadequacies. The uncomfortableness of the
Selfwhen it is out of the flow.
An ultimately weak defense leading to exposure and humiliation. Extremism that keeps
the Self out of the flow.

Line 3 - Ego inflation
The risk that modesty once recognized will self-destruct.
ij) ... Where the otherwise negative contrived modesty is here reinforced by recognition and
maintained as an effective strategy. The extremism ofthe Selfas strategy to control the flow.
If V The 'I told you so' mentality. The capacity of the Self to point out the extremes of others.
Line 2 - Influence

o ... Modesty and right action result in enduring standards. The capacity of the Self to accept
ij) V

~

(f

its extreme nature as correct.
Where the Sun's actions are natural, the Earth's are contrived, though given the power of
this position, the same effect can be expected. The capacity to use the extreme nature of
the Self to influence others.

Line 1- Duty
The ability to confront any challenge without expectations.
... Harmonic relationships which give support for the fulfillment of any task. The capacity
of the Self to confront any challenge through extreme and harmonic relationships.
V Alienation engendered through exaggerated claims. The capacity of the Self to alienate
others through extremes.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A DEEPER EXPLORATION

359

GATE 16: ENTHUSIASM - SKILLS

-The great art ofenriching life by the harmonic channeling of energyLine 6 - Gullibility
The susceptibility to propaganda.
The ability to experience, examine and then reject misleading enthusiasm. The talent to
assess the expression of others.
The same principle but where Neptune will destroy and then seek new forms, Jupiter
will painfully withdraw. Its enthusiasm for social structures permanently prejudiced. The
failure to assess the expression of others.

'¥'
:D

Line 5 - The grinch
The refusal to share in enthusiasm.
A The power to avoid enthusiasm for the sole purpose of being converted. As with Dickens'
Scrooge, eventual conversion leads to greater and more enduring enthusiasm. A lack of
confidence in the expression of skills that needs the encouragement of others.
V The perverse feeling that sharing in enthusiasm hampers individual development. Why
should I be happy when ... etc. A lack of confidence in the value of encouraging others.
Line 4 - The leader
Genuine and sincere support and recognition of others.
Enthusiasm fori and service to higher goals. The skill to recognize and support the talents
of others.
The demagogue. The refusal to support or recognize the talents of others.

J)

0'

Line 3 - Independence
Self-generating and sustaining enthusiasm.
A The proper timing to maintain rhythm and avoid deflation. The independent skill and
possible talent to express proper timing and rhythm.
V The child whose overconfidence may lead to frustration and the ensuing dependence on
others to regenerate enthusiasm; thus creating an unnecessary reliance. The need to have
others confirm one's skills or talent.

Line 2 - The cynic
The sharpness to burst bubbles.
<:) A Self-reliance and the skill to judge objectively any claim regardless of rhetoric. The
expression of the skill to judge objectively.
~ V The compulsive cynic, whose very cynicism is a source of enthusiasm. Objectivity
expressed through cynicism.
Line 1 - Delusion
False enthusiasm.
(I) A The day dreamer. The expression of talent through daydreaming.
~ V The public communication of inevitably unrealized claims. The tendency to express
fantasy as fact.

360

GATE 17: FOLLOWING - OPINION
- The ancient law that those who wish to rule must know how to serve Line 6 - The bodhisattva
Perfectedfollowing, one with and the same as, perfected leading.
J)

... The great nurturer. The nature of this position is always positive. The possibility in

understanding the nature ofinterdependency to express opinions ofvalue to others.
)J. \l The tendency on the perfected path it is a straight line that ends rather than a circle.
Where understanding is achieved, the possibility of having the opinion that there is
nothing else to learn.
Line 5 - No human is an island
The recognition, however understood that there is no end to hierarchies.

The ultimate creative expression of interdependency, whether as God's will or global
synthesis. Opinions that can express the value of being organized whether mundane or
spiritual.
The arrogance, despite all the evidence to claim, that the buck stops here! The possibility
of opinions that refuse to see the value of being organized.
Line 4 - The personnel manager
The ability to probe and discover the underlying motivation and resources of those who
wish to follow. The possibility ofopinions based on the understanding of others.
The overgenerous and often misguided acceptance of would-be followers, often with
disastrous results. The possibility of opinions attracting others.
Line 3 - Understanding
The awareness that the best road is not necessarily the most interesting.

The following of the best road provides the experience necessary to meet the challenge of
the road's end. The understanding that the best opinions are grounded in detail.
The taking of short cuts. One may get to the end quicker, but essential experience will be
missing. The possibility of skipping details and limiting the value of the opinion.
Line 2 - Discrimination
The benefit ofassociations based on the highest values.

o ... The successful achievement of purpose through proper alignment. The possibility to
J)

develop opinions through relationships.
\l An overactive discrimination that leaves one virtually alone. The possibility of being
opinionated at the expense of relationships.
Line 1 - Openness

0' ... The energy to sustain a broad spectrum of stimuli. The possibility of having many
opinions.

'l- \l A tendency to limit openness to aesthetically pleasing stimuli. The possibility to limit
opinions to what is pleasing.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLOR_A_T_IO_N

-----'=3""6c...c
1

GATE 18: WORK ON WHAT HAS BEEN SPOILT - CORRECTION
-The vigilance and determination to uphold and defend basic and fundamental human rights -

Line 6 - Buddhahood
The perfectedform.

r3' A The Buddha state of the eternal child and the energy to find new horizons to avoid stasis.
J)

The potential of the perfected form through correction.
\l The mundane application of the above. The ability to tap public opinion and share
methodology. The potential to share the values of the correction with others.
Line 5 - Therapy

The strength to recognize aproblem and to accept that it is beyondone'spower to solve it alone.
The wisdom to both seek and provide guidance. The potential for correction and
judgment through relationships.
The mental patient. Chronic instability and potential madness. Where relationships
cannot assist in correction the potential of mental instability.
Line 4 -The incompetent

Difficulties as a result of inadequacies that cannot be resolved because of inadequacies.

ED A Given this negative position, survival through suffering. The inability to correct and its
!f

potential for suffering.
\l Indecision and anxiety and no escape from misfortune. The demands of correction and
its potential to generate anxiety.
Line 3 - The zealot
The energetic obsession to clean house.

The dissolution of old forms at an acceptable price. An obsession with correction and its
critical potential.
Rigid judgmentation that creates as many problems as it solves. An obsession with
correction that does not bring satisfaction.
Line 2 - Terminal disease
The recognition that what has been spoilt is irreversible.

'¥!
J)

A Acceptance and strength derived from a faith in spiritual regeneration. The acceptance
that there is no potential for correction.
\l The futile raging against the wind. The refusal to accept that there is no potential for
correction.
Line 1 - Conservatism
The adherence to traditionalpatterns despite and/or in spite ojchanging circumstances.

Gradual modification to avoid eventual upheaval. The potential to correct through
gradual modification ofjudgments.
The Patriarch whose rigidity guarantees deterioration. The potential to refuse to correct.

362

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 19: ApPROACH - WANTING
-That all things are interrelated is apparent and manifested through the action of approach -

Line 6 -The recluse
7he avoidance ofcontact in general but not exclusively.
The fool on the hill. The sage, that if you can find him, will talk to you. The energy which
generally fuels avoidance.
The sulking child. The self-imposed exile that will only end when it attracts appropriate
and soothing reaction. Over-sensitivity to rejection that fuels avoidance.
Line 5 - Sacrifice
7he need to limitpersonalpotential in order to achieve a larger goal.
The self-restraint fundamental to such a nature. Energy to keep one's sensitivities restrained.
A tendency in sacrifice to condescend. Sacrifice can fuel a lack of sensitivity.

(f

•

c;.

V

J)

Line 4 - The team player
Individual approach which attracts and accepts cooperation.
The power and energy for outward activity and the ability to accept others as long as they
can keep up. A driving force that can benefit the whole group. The energy to seek out and
exalt in the company of others.
Attractive and cooperative but a tendency to dissatisfaction with the contribution of
others. A sensitivity energized by the limitation of others.

Line 3 - Dedication
Receptivity to approach can only be maintained through vigilance.
• The natural ease with which communion is maintained. Sensitivity and ease fueled by
acceptance by others.
V A tendency to moodiness that may lead to carelessness. The need to be wanted hampered
by over-sensitivity.
Line 2 - Service
7he dedication ofpersonal resources as a result ofexternal contact.
Dedication and service to the highest values. The energy to want to be of service.
Protracted indecision, but given the nature of this position, eventual compliance. The
need to be wanted that will eventually turn its energy to service.
Line 1 - Interdependence

o • The successful approach that does not loose its individual character in acceptance. The
J)

pressure ofwanting without losing one's identity when being accepted by others.
V The tendency once an approach is accepted to get stuck in continued reflection at the
expense of continued development. The pressure for acceptance which fears eventual
rejection.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A DEEPER EXPLORATION

363

GATE 20: CONTEMPLATION -

Now
- Recognition and awareness in the now which transforms understanding into right action -

Line 6 - Wisdom
Contemplation which results in the ability to apply understanding.
A The establishment for the benefit of society, values, ideals and their patterns and how they
can be understood and applied. The ability to transform individual awareness for general
application and understanding.
\! The same as above but motivated by the self-satisfYing mental challenge rather than
altruism. The ability to transform individual awareness for general application for the
mental challenge.
Line 5 - Realism
Contemplation, in and ofitself, is no guarantee ofsuccess.
Where concentration on detail results in a perfected form. The success of expressing
awareness through detail.
Where reality creates dissatisfaction and adds to instability. The expression of awareness
in the now through dissatisfaction with the reality one sees.

11~

o

Line 4 - Application
Recognition and awareness that can only be transformed into action in cooperation with those
who have the ability to act upon the understanding.
A The teach whose students transcend him. Where the expression ofawareness can only be
turned into action through others. The teacher.
\! A tendency to prefer theory to application. The expression of the awareness as theory
with little interest in its application.
Line 3 - Self-awareness
Understanding derivedfrom analysis ofpersonal actions and effects.
A The proper attunement and development of the personality through self-consciousness.
The expression of self-conscious awareness in the now.
Self-consciousness in the extreme that hampers development. The expression of selfconsciousness in the extreme.
Line 2 - The dogmatist
Restrictive and intentionally limited understanding.
A The limitation if personal and exclusive is less negative through ascetic withdrawal. A
restrictive awareness of the now.
\! The power to lead others down a narrow path. The gift through expression of leading
others down a narrow and restrictive path.
Line 1 - Superficiality
A reliance on shallowness.
A The raising of superficiality to an art form. The sloganeer. Superficial expression as an art form.
\! The superficial expression of the personality. The expression of the superficial personality.

364

GATE 21: BITING THROUGH - HUNTER/HuNTRESS

- The justified and necessary use ofpower in overcoming deliberate and persistent interference Line 6 - Chaos
Where ineffective action leads to disorder.
W • The war of attrition. The continuance of legitimate action in the hope of eventually
succeeding despite all odds and increasing disorder. Where the ego is out of touch, the
display ofwill power leads to disorder.
~ \l Withdrawal and reliance on inner order in a chaotic situation. Where the material
direction is chaotic, the ego will withdraw and use its power to find an inner order.
Line 5 - Objectivity
The use offorce must be based on impartiality and not emotionally motivated.
A principled and legal character that ensures objectivity. The balanced ego whose will
power is applied objectively.
The drive for elimination is so powerful that objectivity is related purely to cause and not
effect. The ego whose will power is applied subjectively.
Line 4 - Strategy
Careful appraisal of opposingforces to establish a proper response.
Success in action through clarity. The ego to succeed on the material plane and the
instinct to use will power effectively in response to conditions.
A tendency, when in the right to misjudge the power of one's opponents. The drive when
in the right to follow one's ego rather than one's instincts.
Line 3 - Powerlessness
Where thejust are condemned to afutile confrontation with superiorforces.
Defeat as a survivable humiliation often acceptable through the abuse of drugs and
alcohol. Unless one follows one's own material path, the breaking ofthe ego by superiors.
Total withdrawal. A lack of will for the material path in order to protect the ego.
Line 2 - Might is right
The legitimacy ofaction in response toflagrant andpersistent interference.
Powerful and extreme reaction. Here, the severest action will be the most successful. The
legitimate rejection ofinterference on the material plane.
A tendency to regret severity, no matter how legitimate. The ego uncomfortable with
severity.
Line 1 - Warning
The use offorce as a last resort.
0' • The fierceness to be respected without recourse to action. The will power and ego to
ensure respect.
J) \l An inherent peacefulness that all too often turns a necessary warning into a plea. A lack
of will power that is forced to ask for respect.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORAT_IO_N

_

GATE 22: GRACE - OPENNESS

- A quality of behavior best suited in handling mundane and trivial situations Line 6 - Maturity
The alignment with experience ofform with substance.
Natural and evident leadership and authority. The possibility that experience in social
interaction will result in a leadership capacity.
The alignment tends to express itself in nonconformist modes. The possibility that
experience in social interaction will result in a non-conformist expression of openness.
Line 5 - Directness
The disregard ofform when required.
The power inherent in higher principles to successfully transgress behavioral codes. The
possibility through emotional awareness to behave individualistically in social interaction.
A tendency to create embarrassing situations, and though invariably successful, the often
resulting reputation for crudity and impudence. The possibility that individual behavior
in social interaction will generate negative projections from others.
Line 4 - Sensitivity
The modification ofbehavior to enrich interactions.
A mediumistic simplicity that rejects elaborate rituals. The possibility ofsocial openness
through the rejection offormality.
An over-reliance on the mechanics of style that can abort potentially significant
relationships. The limitation of social openness through the need for formality.
Line 3 - The enchanter
Perfectedgrace.
Form as a definition and actualization of substance. The possibility for perfected openness
through the alignment of emotional energy and awareness.
Unconscious grace. An innate openness.
Line 2 - Charm school
The beliefthat style can mask nature.
The ability to successfully delude oneself and others. The possibility to attract others with
an emotional style.
The legalization of form over substance. Where the style is energized at the expense of
awareness.
J)

0'

Line 1 - Second class ticket
The ability to accept and enjoy a subordinate position. The emotional awareness to enjoy
a subordinate position.
V The inevitable humiliation that comes with claiming a first class seat with a second
class ticket. Where the emotional energy challenges the awareness and can result in
humiliation socially.
A

366

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 23: SPLITTING APART - ASSIMILATION
- Amorality. The awareness and understanding which leads to the acceptance of diversity-

Line 6 - Fusion
The gradual attunement ofdivenity through synthesis.
The exponential growth of energy and its power of assertion engendered by fusion.
Individual knowing which brings diversity to synthesis.
The principled but futile withdrawal from fusion that leads to atrophy. Individual
knowing that holds on to diversity and loses its power in expression.
Line 5 - Assimilation
The practical acceptance ofthe values ofanotherpath.
)J. ... Expansion and contribution through assimilation. The gift ofcommunicating individual
insight to the collective.
J)
Motive driven assimilation from an inferior position, i.e. for protection or nourishment.
Motive driven assimilation for acceptance and protection from the collective.

v

Line 4 - Fragmentation
Diversification without aperceivedpotentialfor synthesis.
Fatalism and egoism and damn the consequences. Individual expression which has no
collective value.
Atheism and paranoia. Individual expression which engenders isolation and fear.
Line 3 - Individuality
Independent expression that is not by its nature detrimental to others.
Vitality and personal power that can engender jealousy but not threat. Individual
expression which attracts attention but not threat.
An individual mysteriousness that attracts active suspicion and threat. The freak.
Individual expression that attracts suspicion and threat.
Line 2 - Self-defense
The need to abandon tolerance when survival is threatened.
)J. ... The principle of preservation at its most acute. The abandonment of tolerance when
individual expression is threatened.
J) v Where Jupiter will strike out to preserve its integrity, the Moon is often satisfied with just
protecting itself by fending off hostility. The defense of individual expression in the face
of hostility.

3'

v

Line 1 - Proselytization
The attempt to undermine one set ofvaluesfor another.
The sage, who in the extreme can defend evil as a part of the greater good. The powerful
expression of an insight which will undermine established values.
The missionary whose very light will bring darkness. The powerful expression of an
insight which will produce negative effects.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A DEEPER EXPLORATION

367

GATE 24: THE RETURN - RATIONALIZATION
- The natural and spontaneous process of transformation and renewal-

Line 6 - The gift horse
The possibility ofbeing deafwhen opportunity knocks.
The conscious participation in a process that prepares one for easy identification of
opportunity. Identification and focus with the rational thought process.
Innate suspicion which leads inevitably to lost opportunities. Often irrational suspicion
that distorts the focus and can lead to missed opportunities.

J)

0'

Line 5 - Confession
The courage to admit the mistakes ofthe past.
... The practical value of starting with a clean slate, symbolized by the New Moon. Rational
correction that opens the way to new possibilities.
V The tendency to try to minimalize past mistakes through rationalization; turning
confession into justification. Irrational justification of past mistakes.

Line 4 - The hermit
Transformation that can only take place in isolation.
1) ... The discipline and focus that assures renewal. Aloneness enriches the potential for
rational thought.
W V The tendency in isolation to live in a fantasy world. Aloneness encourages the potential
ofillusion or delusion.
Line 3 - The addict
The powerful attraction ofregressiveforms.
~ ... The ultimate though difficult triumph over regression. The difficult but possible task of
overcoming irrationality.
)J, V Addiction and regression legitimized by success. Irrationality maintained and legitimized
by success.
J)

0'

Line 2 - Recognition
... The proper and spontaneous adaption to new forms. The potential gift ofconceptualizing
spontaneously.
V The vanity to see transformation as a personal achievement rather than a socially
supported or natural phenomenon. The mental vanity that the gift of conceptualizing
spontaneously can produce.

o ...

Line 1 - The sin of omission
Transformation that requires retrogressive periods before renewal can take place.
The will to triumph and in this case the faith that the end justifies the means. Inspiration
that demands a reassessment ofpast thinking before a rational concept can be established.
Self-delusion which unnaturally justifies periods of retrogression. Inspiration that leads
to an irrational focus on what is past.

368

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 25: INNOCENCE - THE SPIRIT OF THE SELF

-The perfection of action through uncontrived and spontaneous nature Line 6 - Ignorance
False innocence betrayed by actions.
The least mild of a negative position, where inappropriate action is censured. The loss of
innocence through inappropriate action.
Constant inappropriate and destabilizing actions whose very counter-productiveness
strips away the facade ofinnocence. Constant inappropriate action in times ofchallenges
that can break the spirit.
Line 5 - Recuperation
When innocence is sapped ofits vitality, healing is thefirst priority.
'.l- .... The ability to recognize the inner meaning of an affliction and to withdraw until it is
healed. The power of the spirit to heal and be healed.
)J. v Hypochondria and the need to be healed by others. The weakness of the spirit which
requires healing from others.
Line 4 - Survival
The nature oftrue innocence can be maintained regardless ofcircumstances.
.... The beauty of the rose in the garbage dump. Jupiter is also exalted. The highest principles
even amongst the greatest decadence. The spiritual warrior; the innocence maintained
regardless of circumstances. 0 polarity.
v 0 planet in detriment.
Line 3 - Sensibility
The recognition that innocent action does not in itselfguarantee success.
The power of the ego to withstand failure and still maintain its nature. The power of the
spirit to withstand failure and shock.
The potential loss of innocence through misfortune that in the extreme can manifest
from crime to suicide. The potential loss of spirit through failure or shock.

~

0'

Line 2 -The existentialist
Devotion and dedication to the now.
.... The perfection of the intellect through concentration and focus on what is, rather than, what could
be or has been. The llmocence ofthe Selfand its protection can only be maintained in the now.
v A dedication that can never be free of personal motivation and its attendant projections.
A lack ofinnocence in the now that risks protection through projection.

W ....
~

v

Line 1 - Selflessness
Motiveless action.
The universalization of activity. Psychic attunement that is its own reward. The potential
for centering through attunement to challenges.
A tendency to publicize one's selflessness. The insecurity of the Self manifested in times
of challenge.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

---

369

GATE 26: THE TAMING POWER OF THE GREAT - THE EGOIST

-The maximization of the power of memory applied to the nurturing ofcontinuityLine 6 - Authority
The natural attainment ofinfluencejustified by the correctness ofactions.
The embodiment of reason and purpose that passes the test of time. The strong ego
whose influence is justified by the correctness ofits actions.
\l Authority as a symbol and focus but not necessarily as a true embodiment. The
constitutional monarch, stripped of real power but still the symbol of the continuity
of authority. The expression of the ego as a role whose influence is symbolic and lacks
authority.

o ....
J)

Line 5 - Adaptability

cJ' .... The understanding of mechanics and the application of energy to achieve maximum
potential. The power ofmemorywhich maximizes the potential ofthe ego to attract others.

9- \l A resistance and dissatisfaction when basic changes to nature are necessary. The resistance
of the egoist to adaption.
Line 4 - Censorship
The alteration of memory through elimination.
The ability through censorship to save the collectivity from itself. The power of the ego
maintained through forgetting.
1) \l The use of censorship to maintain the status quo; selective memory in fear of unrestrained
consequences. The power of the ego maintained through selective memory.
Line 3 - Influence
The ability, onceprepared to gather support.
The authority to focus communal effort. The power of the ego to gather support.
1) \l The leadership, while gathering support will underestimate potential challenges. The
egoist unable to recognize the potential challenges in others.

o ....

Line 2 -The lessons ofhistory

o .... The energy and depth of reflection to learn from the past in anticipation of the future.
The power of the ego to mature through experience.
The urge to take action despite the evidence of history. The failure of the ego to respect
experience.
Line 1 - A bird in the hand
The ability to enjoy the dreams engendered by accomplishment in order to avoid the
delusion of unlikely potential. The ego which transcends limitation through dreaming.
Accomplishment as a licence for foolhardy risk taking. The refusal ofthe ego to be satisfied.

370

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 27: NOURISHMENT - CARING
-The enhancement of the quality and the substance of all activities through caring -

Line 6 - Wariness
A protection against an abuse ofgenerosity.

J)

'¥!

A practical and realistic approach to nurturing, whose appropriateness is guided by feelings
and instinct. The power and strength to be realistic in one's capacities to care and nurture.
V A tendency to over-suspiciousness. The power of suspicion in limiting the expression of
caring.

•

Line 5 -The executor
The ability to distribute effectively the resources ofothers.
Either, the gifted and principled agent of distribution or the good sense and ability to
find one. The power and strength to care for the resources of others.
A restrictive nature that hampers distribution or the seeking of advice and assistance.
Weakness and the risk ofloss of power restrict caring.
Line 4 - Generosity
The natural sharing ofattained abundance.
Magnanimous and qualitative sharing. The gift of rewarding those who are deserving.
The power and strength to share generously.
Indiscriminate sharing. The potential loss ofpower and strength through indiscriminate
sharing.
Line 3 - Greed
The obsession with having much more than one needs.
Here, the psychological manifestation. The obsession and dependency on knowing what
is hidden. The secret policeman. The power derived in having more than one needs,
whether sexually, mentally, or materially.
Mundane and wholly without redeeming value, greed, a lust that inevitably cripples and
addicts. The lust for power to get more than one needs.
Line 2 - Self-sufficiency
The obvious law that to give, one must have.
J) • The Mother.1he great nourisher. The strength to nurture and the power to care.
(f' V The child depleting the resources of others. Weakness that can sap the strength and
power of others.
Line 1 - Selfishness

o • The ego-driven first law of caring for oneself which is not necessarily at the expense of
others. The power to care for oneself first.
Envy and its attendant misfortunes. The power of selfishness that is manifested through
envy.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

371

GATE 28: PREPONDERANCE OF THE GREAT - THE GAME PLAYER

-The transitoriness of power and influence Line 6 - Blaze ofglory
Sacrifice rather than capitulation to the law ofdeterioration.
Regeneration and renewal no matter what the price. The deep intuitive drive to win no
matter what the cost.
Self-destruction. The deep intuitive fear ofdefeat and a potentially profound hopelessness
in times of struggle.

o

1l~

Line 5 - Treachery
The abuse oftrust.
The manipulation of the collective, that while pitting one faction against the other, does
not directly support or reject either. The intuitive capacity of the game player to provoke
struggle amongst others.
V' The breaking of alliances with trusted forces to align with more powerful forces and its
attendant destabilization of the whole. The intuitive recognition in times of struggle to
know when alliances must be broken and its destabilizing effect on others.
Line 4 - Holding on
The ability through whatever means to keep one's grip.
.... The application of knowledge to exploit opportunities and usually for the greater good.
A depth ofintuition at its best in struggle and often ofvalue to others.
V' The application of intelligence to hold on, exclusively out of self-interest. A depth of
intuition that is stubbornly selfish in its capacity to hold on.
Line 3 - Adventurism
Unfounded risk taking.
A basic conservatism that even in adventurous acts is necessarily prudent. An intuitive
caution in risk taking in times of struggle.
Here a perverse manifestation of] upiter's expansiveness where risk taking is rationalized
and failure ensured. Intuitive rationalizing of risk taking in times of struggle.

o ....

(J'
~

Line 2 - Shaking hands with the devil
Distasteful alliance.
A means, however unsavory, that is justified by its end. When the game turns to a struggle,
the intuitive acceptance of any alliance in order to win.
The anxiety engendered by sacrificing higher principles when there is no guarantee of
success. 1he risk in sacrificing principles when there is no guarantee ofvictory.

Line 1 - Preparation
.... The desire to be effective manifested in the application of energy to detail. The intuition
to potentially apply energy to detail.
V' The aesthetic appreciation of planning that may have no real application. An intuition for
detail without the potential for application.

372

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 29: THE ABYSMAL - PERSERVERANCE
-The deep within the deep; persistence despite difficulties has its inevitable rewards -

Line 6 - Confusion
The state that exists when momentum outstrips awareness.
Driving blind and given Mars' energy and determination, often blind luck. The power to
persevere that makes no sense.
A tendency in confusion to withdraw rather than accept the condition and continue to
persevere. The power in confusion to caution rather than saying yes.
Line 5 - Overreach
The tendency to bite offmore than one can chew.
The Sun exalted, where the drive is in the design and not ambition driven. The
uncontrollable drive to say yes.
Failed ambition. Saying yes, overextending one's resources, and failing to persevere.

ry
c;.

Line 4 - Directness
The shortest distance between two points is a straight line.
.... The wisdom to use the simplest and most direct approach to solve difficulties. The power
to commit oneself to the simplest and most direct process.
V Simplicity and directness all too often seen as inharmonic and aesthetically crude. The
power of directness often offends others.
Line 3 - Evaluation
In this context, properly assessed inaction.
Despite the urge and cost of inaction the knowledge that it is sometimes better to fight
another day. The power to wait.
A preference for withdrawal in principle with little regard for effect. The inability to make
commitments. The power of caution.
Line 2 - Assessment
Persistence tempered by caution.
The power of sustainment as a guiding light. Saying yes and the power to persevere.
A tendency to overcautiousness when persistence is perceived as adding to rather than
ending disharmony. Caution in saying yes, when perseverance leads to disharmony.
Line 1 - The draftee
The ability to adapt to struggle when necessary but not as a permanent state.
The innate nature to apply energy in times of war and peace. The power to persevere
when necessary but not generally.
A deep impressionability whose mark from times of struggle may make a return to normal
conditions extremely difficult. Hesitation in making commitments based on past experience.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 373

GATE 30: THE CLINGING FIRE - FEELINGS

- Freedom recognized as an illusion and limitation accepted as a fateLine 6 - Enforcement
The discipline to maintain l'ight action.
(f ... The assertiveness to purge the inferior while accepting to lead the weak. The strength to
eliminate negative feelings.
J) 'V An inherent peacefulness that all too often will abide the presence of inferior forces. A
lack of strength in eliminating negative feelings.
Line 5 - Irony
Recognition and dedication to transitory goals.
The strength derived from knowledge and experience that two steps forward and one
step back, is still one step forward. Each new feeling brings back an old feeling before
progress can take place.
The anger engendered by the irony, frustration with its limitations and a desire to
eliminate the entire process. Frustration and anger with the old feelings brought into the
emotional awareness with each new experience.
Line 4 - Burnout
An unrealisticpace that begs misfortune.
A compulsive and hyperactive nature that carries all the earmarks of burnout but doesn't
necessarily arrive at it. A positive outcome is often assisted through analysis. Highly
energized feelings that may lead to emotional collapse.
Uncontrollable expansion with the inevitable bursting of the bubble. Uncontrollable
feelings and accompanying emotional outbursts.
Line 3 - Resignation
The acceptance ofwhat is.
The awareness and manifestation of the law of regeneration. The laws of Karma,
reincarnation and resurrection. The feeling to accept what is.
The tendency by its very knowledge to encourage or avoid despair. The positive or negative
feelings which come with acceptance of what is.
Line 2 - Pragmatism
The balance between extremes.
The productive application of energy without wastage. Not wasting energy on feelings.
'V Over-aggressiveness that chafes against limitations. Feelings which demand energy.

o ...
(f

o ...

Line 1 - Composure
Balance in theface ofdisorder.
The maximization of limitation in all cases. Stability through feelings, no matter what
the situation.
The ability to maintain composure but at the expense of progress. Balanced through
feelings but unable to let go of them.

374

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 31: INFLUENCE - LEADING
- The law offriction, whether active or passive, that engenders transference and thus influence -

Line 6 - Application

o ... Actions which match the words and thus guarantees success. Leadership whose expression
and action must be one and the same.

J)

v A superficiality in application that borders on hypocrisy and is justifiably treated
accordingly. The hypocrisy according to leading in words but not action.

'¥' ...
J)

v

Line 5 - Self-righteousness
Lack ofexternal influence guaranteed by attitude.
A natural specialization that only develops in isolation. However, when the development
is complete, the extremely difficult and generally impossible task of externalizing the
influence. A specialization that demands that one leads oneself.
A deep focus on personal experience that is self-fulfilling and has no external ambitions.
A lack of ambition where one is content to lead oneself.

Line 4 - Intent
The success ofinfluence based on how it is perceived.
J) ... Public acknowledgment of a nurturing and protective influence. External positive
recognition of one's capacity to lead.
0' v Perceived ego aggrandizement and attempted manipulation. External negative projection
of one's capacity to lead.
Line 3 - Selectivity
The ability to carefully assess and choose the proper influence and to tailor one's behavior
accordingly. The capacity to lead enhanced through association with the proper influences.
~alitative selectivity with the risk of a runaway enthusiasm that may lead to humiliation.
The drive to lead that will accept any follower and the risks.
Line 2 - Arrogance
Independent action without guidance.
)J. ... The dedication to higher principles that cannot wait for consensus. Leadership that
cannot wait for consensus.
~
A reasoned arrogance that out of nervous tension jumps the gun and often misfires. 1he
drive for expression that cannot wait and may cost leadership.

v

Line 1 - Manifestation
Influence cannot exist in a vacuum.
The Sun does not/cannot hold back its light and thus its influence on every life. The
natural expression ofleadership.
The absorption of light, that in darkness can only promise manifestation. The unnatural
expression ofleadership.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS,

A DEEPER EXPLORATION

375

GATE 32: DURATION - CONTINUITY

-The only thing which endures is change Line 6 - Tranquillity
Yhe need to calmlyface impermanence.
An underlying acceptance of change that mayor may not lead to tranquillity. The
instinctive awareness to accept change and transformation.
Impermanence as proof of meaninglessness with its attendant manifestations, depression,
delusion, and in the extreme, self-destruction. The fear engendered when change is
experienced as impermanence, and the potential for depression.

:D

d'

Line 5 - Flexibility
Easy adaption to circumstances.
.... The Moon exalted, where superficiality is a valuable tool that while masking the inner
light permits adaption to prevailing conditions. An instinct for adaption in times of
change.
\l 1he urge to express oneself in direct and often violent rejection of conformity. The
potential of the instinct to reject adaption and conformity in times of change.

Line 4 - Right is might
Even in times of change certain underlying principles endure. The instinct to maintain
one's principles in times of change.
1) \l Where Jupiter will establish right action in the larger social realm, Saturn's will lead to
inner strength and endurance as long as it is not threatened from the outside. The instinct
to maintain one's principles as long as one's security is not threatened.
Line 3 - Lack of continuity

!l

.... Indecision and persistent reevaluation, that only because of its basic intelligence manages
to endure. Indecision in times of transformation.

:ll- \l An overreliance on traditionally legitimized standards that in times of change can be
totally out of step and suffer unexpected humiliation. A lack of instinct in times of
transformation.
C?-

:ll-

Line 2 - Restraint
The control of power for the benefit and enhancement of harmony. The potential for
transformation that may be beneficial to others.
\l A tendency in frustration, particularly from a position of strength, to social withdrawal
rather than persistent control. The frustration with controls or being controlled.
....

Lint: 1 - Const:rvation

A life sustaining respect and attention to all aspects of a process. The potential to develop
the instinct through detailed attention to a process.
The uncontrollable urge to bypass essentials which inevitably leads to the disruption of
continuity. The fear oflack of potential, and the corresponding lack of attention.

376

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 33: RETREAT - PRIVACY
- Active withdrawal and the transformation of a weak position into a strength -

Line 6 - Disassociation
The ability to let go.
The will to concentrate on revitalization and not be handicapped by persistent
recriminations. The ability to let go in retreat, to enjoy privacy.
The ability to shed the larger framework that precipitated the retreat, leaving nagging
doubts that hamper revitalization. The inability to completely let go.
Line 5 - Timing
As important as the timing itself, is the ability to keep secret one's intentions until the
appropriate moment. The ability to keep one's intentions secret.
The tendency to want others to participate in the selection of the timing, which can lead
to confusion. Without a sense of timing, letting others in on the secret prematurely with
resulting confusion.
Line 4 - Dignity
A lack ofturmoil in retreat.
The underlying faith in resurrection that turns retreat into an opportunity for renewal
and regeneration. The healthy retreat for regeneration.
Without the guiding light of resurrection, the inevitable dissolution that leads to
degeneration. Forced to retreat, and unable to see its regenerative qualities.
Line 3 - Spirit
The attitude that turns retreat into victory.
The responsible and principled retreat based on preservation but with the determination
to persevere. Privacy as a path to success.
A lack of responsibility in retreat. The bridge burner. A drive for privacy that will cut off
its relationships, often abruptly.
Line 2 - Surrender
The recognition that surrender to superior forces can be an opportunity to expand one's
own strengths and eventually triumph. Embracing powerful forces in order to lay the
foundation for future success.
Unlike the reasoned and calculated surrender above, the deeper and personal surrender.
The feeling that one's original position was a delusion and the impressionability that
makes might right. A public embrace of powerful forces, and a private resentment of
their power.
Line 1 - Avoidance
The wisdom in a weak position to recognize that survival demands complete withdrawal.
Retreating when one realizes that they are in a weak position.
Where courage is just plain fooli hness. Unable to retreat when overwhelmed by
stimulation.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LiNE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

377

GATE 34: THE POWER OF THE GREAT - POWER

- Power is only great when its display or use serves the common goodLine 6 - Common sense
Knowing when enough is enough.
The good sense when having bitten off more than one can chew to spit part of it out. The
restriction of the release of power when one does not have the strength to maintain it.
Enthusiasm overriding better judgment, invariably leads to complications. The lack of
restrictions that can sap one's strength.
Line 5 - Annihilation
The total elimination of resistance.
(f' A The power to destroy completely and once this is accomplished, the ability to transfer the
power to normal purposes. The resistance to release power other than when necessary.
J) '\l A difficulty in shedding the patterns established to deal with resistance. Symbolized by
its phases, the feeling that nothing is permanently annihilated. The discomfort with the
need to always release power.
Line 4 - Triumph
Thefreedom in absolute victory to unlimited use ofpower.
A tendency in victory to restrain excessive power in favour of more subtle and covert
styles. The inherent confidence to use power subtly.
Ego gratification in the unrestrained use of power with impunity, inevitably leading to
abuse. A lack of confidence that can lead to abuse of power.
Line 3 - Machismo
The indiscriminate display ofpower.
1) A The great malefic, where machismo unfortunately is invariably backed up by power. This
is an exaltation only in that it is natural and not contrived. The display of power that
defines any role.
't '\l A reasoned and calculated display. The communication of disinformation.The calculated
display of power in order to define the role.
(f'
~

Line 2 - Momentum
A The ability, when victory is in sight, not to loose perspective. The power that grows when
victory is in sight.
'\l A tendency to be emotionally carried away by the smell of victory. The power for growth
limited by impatience.
Line 1 - The bully
The indiscriminate use ofpower.
The less negative, the resort to power as a manifestation of frustration. The energy to
display power as a response to frustration.
The comeuppance that is the inevitable destiny of the bully. The ever present risk of
retaliation to power displays.

378

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 35: PROGRESS - CHANGE

- By design, progress cannot exist in a vacuum and is dependent on interaction Line 6 - Rectification
The energy to correct.
The process of crystallization coupled with ambition that assures timely and effective
correction. Progressive change that results from correction.
A destructive tendency that in its personal application may be the necessary severity to
ensure correction but when applied generally, it will meet with resistance and tend to
reinforce rather than rectifY situations. Correction which brings change through severity
and even destruction, and will always meet resistance.

"!t

:ll-

Line 5 - Altruism
The sacrifice ofpersonalfor communalprogress.
.A. The principles of interaction and harmony communicated successfully for the benefit of
the whole. Progressive communication that can bring beneficial change to the whole.
V Jupiter in detriment, though altruistic and cooperative in general, a personal regret that in
interaction a greater personal expansion had been lost. Progressive communication, but
always the sense that personal progress has been sacrificed.

Line 4 - Hunger
The insatiable appetitefor progress.
J) .A. Less severe. Symbolized by the phases of the Moon, the drive may be obsessive when the
Moon is full, but like the fading of the Moon the obsession abates. Change for change's
sake. The drive lessens with age.
(J' V The abuse of position to accumulate perks with the inevitable retribution from those unfairly
deprived. The drive for progress that will ultimately step on toes and lead to recrimination.

:ll-

o

CJ
J)

Line 3 - Collaboration
The whole is greater than the sum ofits parts.
.A. Benefic encouragement of others that expands personal as well as communal progress.
The ability to bring progressive change into other's lives.
V The need to be the center that ignores the importance of others. The need to be the center
for progress.
Line 2 - Creative block
Lack ofinspiration which stops progress.
.A. Attunement with the vagaries of the muse and the recognition, creativity is energy that
ebbs and flows. Creativity and the muse will always come and go.
V The need to take action, however mundane, to overcome the feeling of emptiness. The actions
being uninspired do not further progress. The need for change and the fear ofstasis.

Line 1 - Humility
The ability to accept rljection.
CJ .A. The artist that accepts rejection as part of the process. Acceptance ofchange and rejection
as part of the process.
\f V A self-destructive reaction to rejection. Loss ofworth. Change and rejection as humiliation.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

379

GATE 36: THE DARKENING OF THE LIGHT - CRISIS

- The rule of cycles in which decline is a natural but not enduring stage Line 6 - Justice
The inevitable survival of right.
The knowledge and attendant faith that the powers of darkness eventually destroy
themselves. 'Those whom the Gods wish to destroy, they first make mad.'The correctness
of crisis when it arises out of pure feelings.
A profound sorrow and cynicism, that is not diminished by the understanding, that
darkness is self-annihilating. The sorrow or cynicism that comes with seeing that despite
the correctness of the feelings, there is always crisis.
Line 5 - The underground

'¥' ... Perfected survival regardless of conditions. Immunity to crisis as both generator and
surVIvor.

If

v A nervousness that can lead to self-betrayal. Self-betraying nervousness in times of
cnSlS.

Line 4 - Espionage

'¥' ... The ability to prepare for and anticipate decline through the accumulation of secret
J)

v

or privileged information. The realization that knowledge both covert and esoteric is
necessary, if one is to be prepared for crisis and change.
The tendency in recognizing the strengths of the opposition to accept the inevitability
of decline and rather than resist, to offer one's services to guarantee survival. The double
agent. Crisis knowledge that is available to others for a price.
Line 3 - Transition
The point at which decline has exhausted its power.
The ability to establish a new order out of the ashes of the old. The emotional depth to
endure crisis and embrace change.
1he tendency in renewal to try to assimilate the remains of the old order into the new
with the risk that it may rise against the new order once it has regained its strengths. The
embrace of the change, but with feelings that will not let go of the past.

J)

v

Line 2 - Support
Assistance to others in times ofdecline.
The application ofimagination to schemes which benefit others. Feelings that can benefit
others in times of crisis.
The more practical and individual assistance but only when unavoidable and not as a
general principle. Selective assistance in times of crisis.
Line 1 - Resistance
The energy and determination to persevere in the face of opposition. The emotional
power to handle crisis.
An over-principled resistance that rather than being selective in resistance and thus less
at risk, will maintain normal patterns and incur opposition. A resistance to change that
will always bring crisis.

380

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 37: THE FAMILY· FRIENDSHIP

-The Manifestation macro and micro-cosmically of the organic nature of communities Line 6 - Purpose
The energy to maintain thefamily is enhanced by recognizing its values.
... The gift of not only recognizing the inner meaning of the family but an appreciation for
its values. The possibility of extending friendships through the appreciation ofits value.
\! A need for diversity that may ignore the achievements ofthe family in favour ofwithdrawal.
The need for diversity that despite appreciation will prefer casual friendships.
LineS - Love
Natural and unaffected devotion to thefamily.
atural harmony and perfected sharing. Natural harmony and sharing possible through
friendship.
Emotional dependency that often turns love into hatred. The possibility of dependency
turning love into hate.

J)

Line 4 - Leadership by example
Any member ofthefamily may take on a leading role through exemplary behavior.
... The manifestation of the highest principles in everyday and practical affairs. The
possibility of the highest principles in all relationships resulting in a leadership role.
A conservatism that generally only accepts the leadership of the father, who mayor
may not be a valued role model. The possibility of being insensitive to the leadership of
anyone other than those accepted by tradition.
Line 3 - Evenhandedness
The success ofany group is dependent on maintaining order.
The ability to judge what behavior is appropriate and to react in a balanced manner to
transgressions. The possibility to have the sensitivity to know what behavior is appropriate
in a relationship.
An ironic tendency to either test incessantly the borders of acceptability or to respond to
the very same tendency in others with severity. The possible lack of sensitivity to what
behavior is appropriate.
Line 2 - Responsibility

11. ... The understanding of the principle of individual responsibility as the foundation for
~

successful cooperation. The possibility offriendship through individual responsibility.
\! A tendency to point out the responsibility of others. 1he possibility that friendship will
lead to pointing out the responsibilities of others.
Line 1 -The mother/father
A position ofinherent respect that ensures afocus for the development ofguidelines.
... Harmony is the key to the successful maintenance of relationships. It is only through
harmony that the beauty and the values of the family can endure. Friendship that is
rooted in sensitivity and ensures harmony. No polarity.
\! No planet in detriment.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS,

A DEEPER EXPLORATION

381

GATE 38: OPPOSITION - THE FIGHTER

- The ability to preserve individual integrity through opposition to detrimental forces Line 6 - Misunderstanding
Opposition without basis.
Eventual crystallization which clears up misunderstandings. Energy which attracts
misunderstanding, and the stubbornness to face opposition.
The recognition that misunderstanding is at the root of opposition but the insistence, that
it is the misunderstanding of the opposing forces. Where misunderstanding is at the root
of struggle, the energy of stubbornness to insist and maintain one's position.
Line 5 - Alienation
A stage in opposition when one is totally isolated.
The ambition and concentration to endure. The energy to stubbornly fight alone.
Alienation experienced as painful confinement that by its very nature blinds one to the
possibility that there are those at some point who may come to one's aid. The energy for
stubbornness is so strong that it is difficult to recognize, that there are others that can
help in times of struggle.
Line 4 - Investigation
Analysis which strengthens opposition.
The detective who develops or the insider who accepts a joint opposition whose success
can only be based on trust. The energy to recognize who can be of value in times of
struggle.
The aggressiveness in opposition that prejudices investigation and limits trustworthiness.
The power of adrenalin to provoke aggressiveness.
Line 3 - Alliance

o .... The ability to sustain through integration with similar forces, thus ensuring the vitality to
persevere. The energy to integrate with others in times of struggle.
Selfish alliance which saps the energy of one's partners, in order to ensure personal vitality.
The energy to selfishly use others in times of struggle.

'¥' ....
J) v

Line 2 - Politeness
Opposition that does not transgress normal codes ofbehavior.
The value of discretion. The energy for the intuitive awareness for discretion.
An over-politeness that is both servile and obviously superficial and defeats its very
purpose. The energy for over-politeness in times of struggle.
Line 1 - Qualification

0'

v

Tempering opposition based on the circumstances.
A psychic attunement that guarantees proper action. The psychic gift of knowing when
and how to fight.
The tendency to oppose as a general rule. The drive to fight as a general rule.

382

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 39: OBSTRUCTION - PROVOCATION

-The value of obstruction in provoking analysis, assessment and re-evaluation Line 6 -The troubleshooter
The naturalgiftfor solvingproblems.
.A. Practicality and the ability to guide and nurture others. The energy to provoke others by
attempting to solve their problems.
0' '\l Ego dominance that generally abuses this gift for self-aggrandizement and personal ambition
rather than for the benefit of others. The emotional drive to dominate that provokes others.

»

Line 5 - Single-mindedness
The rare ability not to overcome but to bypass obstacles.
The imagination to establish new patterns that make the obstacles irrelevant. The
imaginative energy to provoke through bypassing obstacles.
Simple hardheadedness. Though less exalted, it can often result in success and gather
support by its very determination. The energy to provoke through hardheadedness.

»
o

Line 4 - Temperance
CarefUl evaluation and assessment before taking action.
.A. The values of feelings and instincts in establishing the proper timing. The energy to
provoke at exacdy the right time.
'\l The faulty belief that willpower alone can overcome any obstacle regardless of
circumstances. The energy to provoke that ignores circumstances.

Line 3 - Responsibility
The avoidance ofconfronting obstacles iffailure puts others at risk.
The great benefic whose first consideration is for the larger framework. The energy to
provoke through self-sacrifice.
ffi '\l The often disastrous assumption that others are more at risk if an obstacle is not
confronted. The energy to provoke through the failure to make sacrifices.
Line 2 - Confrontation

» .A. The instinctual and direct assault of obstacles. The energy to provoke through direct
assault.

:ll. '\l The principle of preservation that tempts one to go around an obstacle that should be
tackled head-on. An emotional discomfort when direct assault is essential.
Line 1 - Disengagement

0' .A. The determination when confronted by obstacles to withdraw but only temporarily. The

i

energy to provoke by refusing to confront obstacles.
'\l Disengagement, with an accompanying indecision as to when to reengage. The refusal to
confront obstacles without the capacity to know when to engage. The indecision is also a
provocation.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS,

A DEEPER EXPLORATION

383

GATE 40: DELIVERANCE - ALONENESS

- The point of transition between struggle and liberation Line 6 - Decapitation
The necessary destruction of iriferior forces in positions ofpower before liberation can take
place.
'lhe authority, coupled with the magnanimity to remove from power only those which
deserve such drastic treatment. The power and authority of the ego to eject individuals in
legitimate defense of the group.
Exemplified by the terror of the French Revolution, where the idea of who was deserving
of punishment was cruelly extended to an entire class. The distortion of the ego through
power and authority.

ED

v

Line 5 - Rigidity
The recognition that to achieve liberation all negativeforces must be rejected.
The revolutionary that demands absolute victory. The power of the ego is maintained in
the rejection of negative relationships.
A tendency in revolution to accept a certain amount of necessary deviation on the
assumption that it can be successfully purged later. The weakness of the ego in its
loneliness to maintain and not reject negative relationships.
Line 4 - Organization
The power to transform and the intuitive intellect to select and organize for the purpose
of maintaining deliverance. The power ofthe ego when organized and active, to maintain
seperateness.
An uncontrollable zeal that ignores the quality of support in preference for the quantity
which in the long run may destabilize deliverance. The empowering of the ego through
the capacity to organize others.
Line 3 - Humility
A calculated mode in deliverance to avoid attracting the attention ofnegativeforces.
The subtlety to enjoy deliverance without having to flaunt it. The capacity of the ego to
avoid negative forces even ifit means being alone.
The ego arrogance that demands attention and gets it. The capacity of the ego to demand
attention.

o •
J)

v

Line 2 - Resoluteness
The power and authority in deliverance to shed forever the qualities which hampered
liberation. The power through aloneness to recognize the importance and the potential
disruptive effect of others.
A natural peacefulness that in deliverance may sympathize with and attempt to nurture
the forces which hampered liberation. The power of loneliness to blind the ego to the
possible disruptive effect of others.
Line 1 - Recuperation

o • The ability to relax and enjoy the fruits ofone's labours. The ego strength to enjoy being alone.
J) v 1he Moon cannot stand still. The ego uncomfortable with being alone too long.

384

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 41: DECREASE - CONTRACTION

- The limitation ofresources which maximizes development ofpotentialLine 6 - Contagion

The law that the maximization 0/ potential not only ends decreasc but incvitably such

transcendence benefits others.
The maximization of the potential of form. The father whose success will benefit his
children. The fuel for recognition through feelings.
The tendency in transcendence to keep it a secret in fear of being deprived of its special
advantages. The fuel for secret or repressed feelings.

d'

t:;

m
t:;

Line 5 - Authorization
The external recognition ofone's potential despite limitations.
.A. The value of energy when properly channelled. The fuel for properly channelled feelings
despite limitations.
\l A persistent dissatisfaction with limitation which hampers development even when
supported. Limitations initiate the fuel for negative feelings.
Line 4 - Correction
Successful adaptation to limitation.
.A. Survival of the fittest and its eventual flourishing. The energy for adaption and a deep
feeling for survival.
\l The expenditure of energy on maintaining relationships rather than on correction. In
times of decrease weak associations are shunned as costly, no matter how attractive. The
energy which fuels holding on to feelings rather than adapt.

Line 3 - Efficiency
In times ofdecrease selfishness isjustified.
1) .A. Material ambition and the discipline to go at it alone. The energy that fuels the feeling
for personal ambition.
J) \l Instinctive assistance, admirable but in this position misguided, where two will use up
resources twice as fast as one. The energy that fuels the feeling to share.
Line 2 - Caution
Humanism tempered bypragmatism.
A conservative nature that does not risk its own security in aiding others. Energy for
one's own feelings but not for others.
A desire for recognition that throws caution to the wind, depleting valuable resources for
only temporary gain. The energy for the display of feelings for recognition.
Line 1 - Reasonableness
The appropriate delegation ofresponsibility.
\j! .A. The imagination to make the very best out of very little. Coolness, where the energy to
release feelings is selective.
~ \l A tendency in understanding, to assume capability, leading to strain. The hothead, the
urge to release feelings.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LiNE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

385

GATE 42: INCREASE - GROWTH

- The expansion of the resources which maximizes the development of full potentialLine 6 - Nurturing
... A natural and instinctive nurturing of others. The power to share the process of growth
with others.
1) V A restrictive and malefic materialism that is self-alienating and encourages aggression.
The refusal to share the benefits ofgrowth with others.

J)

Line 5 - Self-actualization

o ... The fulfillment and actualization of purpose as a natural path whose reward is a healthy
c;.

J)

c;.

sense of self, rather than the power and influence that naturally follow. Growth that is
self-fulfilling and naturally leads to influence.
V Self-actualization as a strictly inner experience that may demand or result in a reclusive
nature. Inner growth that empowers reclusiveness.
Line 4 - The middle man
... The quintessential manifestation of the mediator. The maturity to bring growth through
mediation.
V Where the gift to establish and maintain relationships is ill-suited in this position to act
in mediation where harmony must take a back seat to pragmatism. A lack of maturity
where the power to harmonize distorts mediation and limits growth.

Line 3 - Trial and error
In times ofincrease, mistakes are a naturalpart ofthe process.
(f' ... The energy and assertion to turn mistakes into advantages. The power to accept mistakes
as part ofgrowth.
J) V A moodiness, that in error may succumb to brooding and unnecessary caution. Mistakes
give power to moodiness and caution.
Line 2 - Identification

o ... Recognition and acute capitalization of trends. Power for growth through participating
c;.

in trends.
V An ascetically motivated withdrawal in times of progressive change. Growth which stops
in reaction to trends or change.
Line 1 - Diversification

o ... The ability when surplus resources are available to extend one's activities beyond their
!i?

v

normal scope. Growth through expansion particularly when defined to the root.
A tendency when surplus resources are available to centrifugal application. Decadence.
Too much expansion can lead to decadence.

386

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

------

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 43: BREAKTHROUGH - INSIGHT

- In order for achievement to be maintained a new order must be fairly established Line 6 - Breakthrough
Actualization and centering, that in breakthrough naturally establish both internally and
externally a new order. Unique knowing that is both personally and collectively ofvalue.
An ego tendency that in breakthrough sees justification of its lesser attributes and carries
them over into the new order. Where the value of knowing is more important then other
aspects of the life.
J)

~

1l.

Line 5 - Progression
.... The step by step adaptation to relationships which hinder breakthrough through practical
actions which will not jeopardize eventual success. The gift of knowing when an unique
insight can be shared with effectively with others.
\] A tendency to concentrate on harmonizing relationships that tends to strengthen the
position of restrictive forces rather than benefiting breakthrough. An over-reliance on the
receptivity of others that turns harmony into the conditioner ofindividual expression.
Line 4 -The one-track mind
.... The overreliance and stubborn obsession with one's mental abilities in the face of
recurring obstacles. This design, given Mercurial mental gifts, may though rarely succeed.
A stubborn reliance on one's unique insights that demands focused mental ability to be
properly conceptualized.
\] A belief in inherent right action based on limited knowledge that shuns advice. The
vanity to attempt expression without depth.
Line 3 - Expediency

W .... The powerful drive for regeneration that will, when breakthrough is threatened, use any
J)

means, align with any force and endure any condemnation to achieve the goal. A certainty
in knowing which can withstand condemnation.
\] An oversensitivity to condemnation, that may preclude justified expediency and result in
failure. Individual insight abandoned in the face of condemnation.
Line 2 - Dedication

W .... The maintenance of specialized attitudes which promote breakthrough. Unique mental
habits and thought processes which promote insight.
J)

\] A dedication to action, that when actualization is in sight may become incautious. The

urge for expression that will abandon its normal processes when an opportunity arises.
Line 1 - Patience

W .... The recognition that new forms cannot be established until resistance has been eliminated.
The depth necessary to bring into form an individual insight.

':l- \] An impatience to enjoy the sweets of accomplishment that inevitably leaves a sour taste
in the mouth. A delight in the insight but a lack of depth to establish it.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER E_X_P_L_O_R_A_T_IO_N

----.::e
3c::c
8-'-7

GATE 44: COMING TO MEET - ALERTNESS

-The success of any interaction is based on the absence of any preconditions Line 6 - Aloofness
A perfected renewal in which the establishment ofa new form inures one to the condemnation
of the rejected. The awareness ofpatterns which ensures one's instinctive well-being.
Intolerance and arrogance for lesser mortals. The awareness ofpatterns which can bolster
the ego at the expense of the well-being of others.
Line 5 - Manipulation
The ability to transform interaction with inferior elements into the energizing ofprogressive
process with the additional benefit, that in tapping the inferior elements they remain weak.
Where the instinctive recognition ofthe patterns leads to the possible manipulation ofothers.
The tendency in this form of manipulation to become abusive and degenerate to their
level. The possibility that the instinctive recognition of the patterns could lead to the
abuse of others.

o

Line 4 - Honesty
The refusal to engage in hypocritical interaction.
Indifference at its most logical and cu tting. The indifference possible when guided by the
instinctive memory.
\l The Sun in detriment, that in extreme situations, in cases of self-sustainment, will expect
assistance from forces it has totally rejected. Here the honesty is the genuine need. The
sacrifice of indifference for survival.
Line 3 - Interference
Thefailure to interact based on circumstances.
The ability to recognize the threat of interference and to prepare for its effects. The
alertness and instinct to handle the ego of others.
A deluded response to interference that gets stuck in projection and as a result is unrealistic in
appraisal and error prone. The possibility that the instinct cannot handle the ego of others.
Line 2 - Management
The development and management of a proper collective structure which restricts inferior
elements by creating cooperative modes that integrates these forces with progressive and superior
forces. The possibility that alertness to patterns will result in management capability.
A tendency in management to concentrate exclusively on goals, ignoring inferior elements
which leads inevitably to quantitative success and qualitative failure. The instinctive
memory for the patterns that bypasses the development of managerial capability.

'fiJ

c;.

Line 1 - Conditions
The establishment offrameworks as the result ofinteraction.
.... A mastery of the collective that can establish restrictive conditions for inferior components
and with the ability to enforce them. An alertness to patterns than can lead to mastery of
the collective.
\l An attractive nature that will interact with inferior forces and will fail to apply restrictions
resulting in a risk to continued harmony The failure ofthe instinct out ofthe need for harmony.

388

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 45: GATHERING TOGETHER - THE GATHERER

-The natural and generally beneficial attraction oflike forcesLine 6 - Reconsideration
An outsider that can admit that itsprior rEjection was an errOl, willgenerally be accepted into
the gathering.
An innate empathy with the outsider mentality and its eccentric and often misunderstood
logic. A material direction which serves the outsider.
Where Uranus will innovate to find a place for an outsider, Jupiter will demand that it
conforms. A material direction that is focused on conditioning the outsider to conform.
Line 5 - Leadership
Allgathering together must have a center and afocus.
The intuitive intellect and gift for innovation that enhance the group effort and ensure
continuity through respect of the center. The gift for expressing leadership on the
material plane.
A sense of right action that assumes a respect that may not as yet have been earned. The
drive for leadership that may not have yet earned the right.
Line 4 - Direction
The ability to focus the opportunity of gathering together for the service of higher
principles. The expression of higher principles on the material plane.
The tendency to try to influence the direction of a group action for personal benefit. The
lack of expression of higher principles on the material plane.
Line 3 - Exclusion
The ability when excluded to take whatever measures are necessary to dissolve the
antiquated form and to accept even humiliation to achieve inclusion. The instinct to find
a way to be included in a material process.
An aggressive and often violent reaction to exclusion. The expression offrustration when
included in a material process.
Line 2 - Consensus
Gathering together is strengthened by acknowledged common interest.
The inventiveness to establish techniques by which common ground can be assessed. A
material direction through the expression of techniques for the benefit of others.
An innate rebellion against conformity. The refusal to accept the material techniques of
others.
Line 1 - Canvassing
The ability to promote and develop gathering together through the education of the
uncommitted. The material direction lies in education.
An overzealousness that turns canvassing into proselytization and tends to alienate rather
than gather support. The drive for material that leads to aggressive education.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LiNE DESCRIPTIONS, A DEEPER EXP_L_O_R_A_T_IO_N

-----=3-=-=.89

GATE 46: PUSHING UPWARD - THE DETERMINATION OF THE SELF

- Good fortune that may be perceived as the result ofserendipity but derives from effort and dedication Line 6 - Integrity
The wisdom to secure one's identity through careful consideration of the restrictive
potential of commitments. The determination to say no to restrictive commitments.
Deceiving oneself and others by overextending one's resources and eventually being in
the position of having to break promises. A drive for success that will not say no, and will
end up breaking promises.
J)

\.!!

Line 5 - Pacing
The maintenance of proper rhythm that in its instinctive practicality avoids radical
divergence from successful patterns. The determination to stay with the rhythm which
brings success.
V An irrational rejection of the very patterns that have proven successful. Determined to
say no to the very rhythm that brings success.

•

Line 4 - Impact
The ability, once recognized, to move rapidly from a position of obscurity to influence.
The good luck which comes from being determined that eventually, in the right place at
the right time, leads to recognition.
A reaction in achievement that tends to bite off the hand that fed it. The determination
in success to ignore those who helped create it.
J)

0'

Line 3 - Projection
A practical approach to good fortune, that maintains the same patterns and attitudes that
brought success and does not get sidetracked by indulging in further expectations. The
determination to stay with what brings success.
V A tendency through projection to treat a potential future as the present, leading to
unjustified egoism and the loss of momentum and support. The determination to treat a
projected success as a reality.

•

Line 2 - The prima donna

o • A difficult and demanding nature that succeeds despite its behaviour because of the depth
of its talents. The determination to succeed that may offend others.
Unrealistic demands and offensive nature of egocentric mediocrity.lhe determination to
be treated as a success before it has been realized.
Line 1 - Being discovered
Dedication in obscurity that is unexpectedly discovered.
Art for art's sake. Any creative endeavour that is self-fulfilling sooner or later is recognized.
The potential for creative success through dedication.
The ability to judge the potential of those in obscurity but often solely to benefit one's
own success. The determination to recognize and benefit from the success of others.

390

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 47: OPPRESSION - REALIZATION
- A restrictive and adverse state as a result ofinternal weakness or external strength or both-

o

Line 6 - Futility
A difficultpositionfor which there is no exaltation.
.... No polarity.
\! The Sun in detriment, where the strength of will alone may find a way to adapt and
survive, but without hope of ever overcoming the oppression. Life as an ordeal stripped
of realization.
Line 5 -The saint
This position has special significance and there is no planet in detriment.
.... The gift in times of oppression to maintain without hypocrisy a harmonic relationship
with one's oppressors, while providing aid and succor to the oppressed. Realization at
its most exalted. Acceptance of the weight of the abstract process and the grace that
naturally follows. No polarity.
\! No planet in detriment.

Line 4 - Repression
The constraints ofexternal oppression.
1) .... The strength of identity that even in times of the most powerful oppression can maintain
its resources and to some extent ensure their survival for the benefit of others. A sense of
identity that can be maintained despite external conditioning.
J) \! When robbed of its light, the Moon is lost in darkness; barely able to nourish itself, let
alone others. The identity overwhelmed by external conditioning.
Line 3 - Self-oppression
The conscious and well integrated being whose natural right action will eventually come
to see the unfoundedness of its oppression. The eventual realization that one is really o.k.
A self-oppression so highly energized that it may prove irreversible and destructive.
Extreme difficulty in realizing one's self-worth.
Line 2 - Ambition
1) .... The ambition and drive to overcome personal oppression in order to achieve security.
Realizing that to be busy is mentally healthy.
~ \! An indecisiveness in times of personal oppression, whether to apply intelligence to
recovery or accept its weight to take advantage of other prevailing conditions that may
only be temporary. The inability to sense when and which activity is healthy.
Line 1- Taking stock
The ability in times of hardship to concentrating on eradicating the negative factors that
have led to oppression. Realizing that negative thoughts have to be eradicated.
The delusion of seeing oppression as an exclusively external phenomenon with often
disastrous results. The sense that the world is against you.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

391

GATE 48: THE WELL - DEPTH

-The necessary and qualitative foundation that is a prerequisite to establish the common good -

J)

Line 6 - Self-fulfillment
An undiminishable resource.
... The valued center, that as it gives, it receives and thus can continue to give. A depth and
potential talent that is ofvalue to others.
\! A tendency to superficiality, that though generous and nurturing, will lack the inspirational
quality that can transform its gift into a common currency. Where the depth is limited
the taste will be superficial and affect the quality of the possible talent.
Line 5 - Action
The natural urge to apply energy to action. A taste for action.
An overreliance on the need for protection that in times of social renewal is obsessed with
the details of planning at the expense of action. Insecurity with one's depth that can fail
to take action.
Line 4 - Restructuring

o ... The good sense to take advantage of restriction on short term actiVity to assess the
situation and restructure for long term goals that will facilitate development when activity
resumes. The awareness that depth and its possible expression will face restrictions with
a resulting taste for short term projects.
A resistance to restructuring on speculation, with the tendency when activity resumes to
have to do so anyway. A taste for long term projects that will be frustrated in restraint.
J)

Line 3 - Incommunicado
... Symbolized by the 'no Moon' phase, where the potential of light is unrecognized,
unavailable and unknowable. The redeeming value is in the transience of such a stage
which can give strength to those so afflicted. Where the development of taste and depth
is a long term process.
\! The profound anxiety when a profound intelligence is forgotten in the wilderness. The
tendency in a long term process (development of taste and depth) to anxiety.
Line 2 - Degeneracy

W ... The awareness that to successfully establish a new form one cannot neglect the most
'-l-

positive attributes just to accommodate inferior elements. This would lead to deterioration.
A confidence in awareness to resist inferior influences.
\! The misguided urge for harmony that degenerates when associated with inferior values
into decadence. Alack ofconfidence in awareness that invites interference and decadence.

Line 1 - Insignificance
... An instinctive recognition of what is practical and deserves attention. A taste for
recognizing what is practical and deserves attention.
(1' \! An ego tendency to apply energy to trivial considerations. A taste for trivia.
J)

392

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

---------

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 49: REVOLUTION - PRINCIPLES

- Ideally the transformation offorms based on the highest principles and not simply for powerLine 6 - Attraction
The power ofrevolution in action to expand its support.
An innate impressionability that transforms the fence-sitter into the committed. The

sensitivity and potential to embrace and transform others.
Stubborn, and often fatal, rejectionism. Oversensitivity that leads to rejection of
principles and others as a rule.
Line 5 - Organization

:» ... Practical provisions for the needs of others in revolutionary times which ensures support
and continued understanding. A potential sensitivity to the practical needs of others.

0' \J A concentration on the organization of power to clearly define authority often at the
expense of higher principles. A rejection of higher principles in seeking to organize
others.
Line 4 - Platform
A political and social agenda, embodied in guarantees to human rights that ensures a just
and valued replacement of the old order. A potential sensitivity to the needs of society.
Promises, promises, promises and only to guarantee support with little possibility of
implementation. A potential to insensitively take advantage of the needs of society.
Line 3 - Popular discontent
The ability to destroy antiquated forms once the restrictions have been removed. The
potential in sensitivity to reject failed principles or relationships.
Pluto in detriment, with general support, a savageness in eliminating the old order that
may permanently scar the new. An insensitivity in rejection and rejecting.
Line 2 - The last resort
The determination to exhaust every possible peaceful avenue for change and then when
satisfied that no other course is possible, to plan in detail before revolution is attempted.
The potential to explore every possibility before rejecting.
The overwhelming revolutionary urge that is impatient with accommodation and
negotiation. The tendency here is the coup d'etat that has little general support.
Impatience with accomodation.

o

Line 1 -The law of necessity
Revolution has no support unless it is perceived as necessary.
The understanding and application of this law to maximize expansion of support and
thereby ensure viability. The awareness that the potential of a principle is based on it
being accepted as viable.
\J The misuse of influence, to insist that necessity can be created out of action. The 'Helter
Skelter' syndrome.To commit acts ofdisorder as proof that disorder exists. Oversensitivity
to rejection that can turn a principle into a crusade.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A

393
----------------'=-=

DEEPER EXPLORATION

GATE SO: THE CAULDRON - VALUES

-The value ofhistorical continuity whose traditional values serve and enrich the present and future-

J)

Line 6 - Leadership
.A. The gift in a position ofpower to maintain harmony even in severity. The strength to maintain
one's values with vigor and continue to have harmonic relationships with others.
\! An inherent moodiness, that in a position of power may at times alienate or offend
and effect overall efficiency. The strength to maintain one's values but at the expense of
harmonic relationships
Line 5 - Consistency
When continuity has brought success, it should not be tampered with.
The disciplined and natural conservatism to avoid unnecessary change. The conservative
awareness that basic principles should not be abandoned casually.
A perverse reaction to rebel against the methodology of one's very success. When
effectively stimulated, the drive to rebel against basic principles.
Line 4 - Corruption
The lack ofenriching values.
The malefic gift of turning inferior values into material success. Given this difficult
position, Saturn's exaltation is, that its actions are limited to selfishness and unsavouriness
rather than criminality. The capacity to maintain one's strength despite inferior values.
With such energy and no traditional values, the worst can be expected. The potential
disregard ofvalues that may lead to corruption or the breakdown of the defense system.

J)

Line 3 - Adaptability
.A. The Moon exalted, that when unable to make it alone will naturally align itself with
nurturing and protective forces. The awareness that to maintain one's principles and
values the support of others is necessary.
\! A resentment when its natural mental gifts are ignored and is forced to curry favour in order
to survive. Discomfort with the awareness that one cannot stand alone by one's principles.
Line 2 - Determination

o .A. The strength of purpose that can enjoy overcoming adversity to achieve its goals. The
~

0'
~

strength derived from maintaining one's values in the face ofopposition or conditioning.
\! A discomfort with adversity that may lead to determined withdrawal. A lack ofstrength,
where values are threatened by opposition or conditioning.
Line 1 -The immigrant
IIumbleneH oforigin that benefits rather than restricts destiny.
.A. The desire to be effective and successful that builds on the most fundamental strengths
while it refines its nature. The awareness that the growth and refinement of values will
benefit destiny.
\! A dissatisfaction with/or embarrassment with origins, that makes an obsession of
refinement. A dissatisfaction with original values that demands refinement.

394

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 51: THE AROUSING - SHOCK

- The ability to respond to disorder and shock through recognition and adaptation Line 6 - Separation
In times of crisis when all those around are confused and in disorder, the ability not to
succumb to the panic but to have the will and vitality to survive it alone. The power of the
ego to meet challenges alone.
Curiously, the same gift, but one by its attitude that invites disapproval that in the extreme
may even prevent a successful separation. The egoism to meet the challenge alone that
may provoke and empower the challengers.
Line 5 - Symmetry

o .A. Perfected illumination that in grasping the nature of the shock, can transform its normal
d'

patterns into a symmetrical adaptation that rides the shock and avoids its devastation.
The perfection of the warrior ego through instinctive adaptation.
\7 A tendency in seeking the core, to harmonize with one shock only to be overwhelmed by
the next. The egoism to indulge in victory and lose vigilance.
Line 4 - Limitation

'tI .A. A pure inventiveness and sometimes genius to find some opportunity even in the midst
~

of the most devastating shocks. The warrior ego that will find some way to answer the
challenge.
\7 A reasoned make-do mentality that is ineffectual in times of severe shock. The superficial
ego that lacks the resources and depth to answer challenges.
Line 3 - Adaptation

o .A. The life-sustaining awareness that thinks on its feet and thus creates opportunities. The
power of spontaneity in times of challenge.
1he destabilization that occurs when one's field of normal activity is radically and
unpredictably disturbed, where the tendency is withdrawal rather than adaptation. The
ego that may be destabilized in times of challenge.
Line 2 - Withdrawal

d' .A. The recognition of the mechanics of shock that indicates when withdrawal is the only
~

'¥!
c;.

logical action. The instinctive withdrawal when the power of the ego is threatened.
\7 Being too smart for one's own good and rejecting withdrawal in the vain belief that one
can outsmart natural forces. The egoism to reject withdrawal and face possible defeat.
Line 1 - Reference
The advantage ofprevious crisis experience.
.A. The gift of re-examination that is the foundation of preparedness. The power of the ego
conditioned by experience.
\7 A tendency to emotional withdrawal after a shock. The weakness of the ego in times of
challenge.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A DEEPER EXPLORATION

395

GATE 52: KEEPING STILL (MOUNTAIN) - STILLNESS
- Temporary and self-imposed inaction for the benefit of assessment-

CJ

'¥

Line 6 - Peacefulness
... A harmonic and balanced attunement that is at ease regardless of the situation. The lack
of pressure in times of stillness.
V Delusion as a substitute for genuine tranquillity. Given the positive nature of this position,
the delusion may be just as effective as the 'real thing'. Where the pacification of the
energy is extreme, pressure real or imagined does not disturb the stillness.
Line 5 - Explanation
In times ofinaction, the often important ability, to explain one'sposition.
The often terse but exceedingly accurate statement. Where inaction and focus can lead
to detail.
A convolution whose enigmatic nature is normally misunderstood with unpredictable
circumstances. Where too much inaction can lead to a loss offocus, and not to detail.
Line 4 - Self-discipline
Perfected self-discipline and restraint that deals easily and wisely with impulsive
temptations. The energy for restraint which recognizes the value of stillness and focus.
Though responsive to the need of a principled control based on the understanding of
conditions, there is a tendency due to its natural expansiveness, to doubt and restlessness.
Restless energy and doubt in the face of restraint.

Line 3 - Controls
External enforcement ofinaction.
1) ... The ability by its very nature to understand restraint with the potential in acceptance, to
use the period to redefine strategies. The energy for acceptance in inaction.
CJ V A deep dissatisfaction with controls that disturb tranquillity, leads to emotional withdrawal
and affects vision. The pressure of restraint disturbs tranquillity.
CJ
(J'

Line 2 - Concern
... The pause that is initiated to benefit others. The pressure to restrain energy for the benefit
of others.
V A selfish and abrupt pause that may endanger others unnecessarily. The pressure to
selfishly restrain energy at the expense of others.
Line 1 - Think before you speak
The pause that is so profound that it leads to silence. The pacification ofenergy that leads
to stillness.
Speaking first and living with the consequences afterwards. Energy that cannot be stilled.

396

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 53: DEVELOPMENT - BEGINNINGS

- Development as a structured progression that is both steadfast and enduring Line 6 - Phasing
J)

... The successful utilization of the completion of a stage in development, that by its evident

'¥'

success and value can be used as an example to attract support for the next stage. The
energy to attract support for beginnings based on the success of the past.
\l A tendency in this position, to hide success, in the perverse fear that the success will either
create excessive demands or supporters of the original process will end their support upon
completion. The pressure to hide beginnings in fear oflosing past support.
Line 5 - Assertion
The underlying and often psychic recognition of the intrinsic values of development, that
even in periods ofisolation, has the assertiveness to maintain direction. Its very power garners
continued support even from those who are basically opposed. The pressure to recognize
the value ofdevelopment and the energy for beginnings regardless ofcircumstances.
An over-assertiveness, that rather than applied to maintaining support in the face of
opposition and isolation, may actually strengthen the opposing forces by its attitude.
Where the energy for beginnings attracts the very forces that can abort them.

J)

Line 4 - Assuredness
... The ability to maintain the strength of one's individuality in complex and often awkward
situations, that ensure continued security and development. The pressure to maintain
one's individuality in confused beginnings.
\l The persistent difficulty with embarrassing or awkward situations where normal emotional
reactions may prove detrimental. Individual pressure for beginnings that creates awkward
and sometimes embarrassing situations.
Line 3 - Practicality

J)

... In its most natural position, the concentration on avoiding conflict to ensure protection

and continued development. The pressure to eliminate conflict in order to develop.

if' \l The unconscious provoking of conflict that logically threatens security and development.
Energy which provokes conflict and threatens development.

J)

cJ

Line 2 - Momentum
Success breeds success.
... The protection of early success nurtures further achievement. The pressure to start
something new based on past success.
\l A tendency with early success to haste and imprudent action. The pressure based on
success to be impatient for something new.
Line 1 - Accumulation

'¥ ... The dissolution of old forms but not at the expense of valued components that will be
'/.

retained and transformed. The pressure to begin something new, not from scratch but
based on the foundation of the old.
\l Development hampered by criticism and the tendency to withdraw rather than make use
of these experiences. The difficulty in starting something new because of the criticism
that accompanied the old.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS,

A DEEPER EXPLORATION

397

GATE 54: THE MARRYING MAIDEN - DRIVE
- Interaction in its mundane social context but also one's mystical and cosmic relationships -

Line 6 - Selectivity
The ingrained responsibility, in terms of maintaining security and personal identity that
will naturally restrict its relationships to ones that are mutually beneficial. The energy to
restrict relationships that hinder ambition.
A generally benefic and expansive nature that assumes that it can instill, what is
otherwise missing in its partners. A waste of energy. The waste of energy in maintaining
relationships which hinder ambition.
Line 5 - Magnanimity

o ... The natural authority and actualizing spirit, that in a position of power, can have genuine
and fruitful relationships with the less advantaged. (As long as they are in service and
make no demands.) The energy for actualizing that despite this power fuels fruitful
relationships with others. No polarity.
\! No detriment.
Line 4 - Enlightenment/Endarkenment
Here, in this most mystical ojpositions, there is neither an exaltation nor a detriment,jor in
truth, they are the same.
... \! The Alpha and Omega. The end and the beginning. There is no description possible. Each
planet will manifest this energy uniquely with absolutely no guarantee that its effects will
even be perceived. However, the potential is always there. The fuel for transformation at
its purest leveL No polarity. No specific planetary accent.
Line 3 - Covert interaction

'¥! ... The ability when stymied in formal relationships to use secret or purely informal channels,
~

when it is the only resort. The drive when blocked to use secret means to fuel ambition.
\! The insistence that formal channels, no matter how frustrating, can be overcome by
the power of attraction. The energy of ambition when blocked will fuel the power of
attraction to overcome the obstacle.
Line 2 - Discretion
The wisdom once a relationship is formally recognized to restrain the temptation to take
advantage of past informal interactions. The energy of restraint fuels ambition.
Recognition, in the formal sense, seen as a licence to take advantage ofinformal knowledge.
A lack of loyalty. Ambition energy which can fuel disloyalty.
Line 1 - Influence

'¥! ... The ability to achieve influence through secret relationships, anywhere from the private
~

adviser to the Satanist. Ambition energized through secret relationships which fuel
influence.
\! A socially misguided insistence on formal recognition of a relationship, that in terms of
influence, will diminish its power. Ambition which demands formal recognition limiting
influence.

398

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 55: ABUNDANCE - SPIRIT

- Abundance is strictly a question of spirit Line 6 - Selfishness
1) ... Acquisition obsession that though alienating, is still indirectly beneficial m::lteri::llly to
others. The possibility of finding the spirit through materialism.
J) \l Where the material abundance exists, but no one gets to share its light. The 'no Moon' phase.
The possibility that materialism becomes obsessive with a 'mean' spirit that will not share.

o

Line 5 - Growth
The unusual ability in a position of power to accept advice and transform it innovatively.
This gift in a position of power allows one to continue to lead rather than being perceived
as being led. The emotional strength and spirit derived from positions of power.
\l An integrative openness that in its broad acceptance of advice may be eventually eclipsed.
An emotional openness where the spirit is at risk from conditioning.
Line 4 - Assimilation
The establishment of a framework that balances principles with energy and leads
inevitably to expansion and prosperity. The possible spirit that comes when emotional
awareness and energy are balanced and principled.
Boundless energy that knows no restraint. Boundless energy that ignores awareness at
the risk of the spirit.
Line 3 - Innocence
Here, 'I was onlyfollowing orders: is a genuine defence.
When the form is correct and attempts at actualization have been disciplined and within
guidelines, failure cannot be personally attributed. The emotional possibility to recognize
that despite one's best efforts, failure is possible and does not need to affect the spirit.
Mars in detriment, where a struggle against conformity or individual initiative can bring
a superior to ruin while safely hiding behind his shield. The energy to selfishly protect
one's spirit at the expense of others.

~

m

Line 2 - Distrust
Abundance hampered by slander orgossip.
.A. The gift of being able to penetrate to the center that may demonstrate effectively through
its relating talents, that its trustfullness is genuine. Emotional stability and the strength
of the spirit is dependent on being trusted byothers.
\l The direct challenge to the slanderers who will always have the advantage of quoting
the Bard: 'Methinks he doth protest too much.' Only continued example can overcome
distrust. The emotional drive to insist on trustworthiness that does not guarantee its
acceptance by others or benefits the spirit.
Line 1 - Co-operation

11. .A. The expansion of activity through cooperation with powerful forces through principled
~

actions that guarantee continued support and engender prosperity. The potential to find
the spirit through co-operation with powerful forces.
\l The concentration on harmonic relationships with powerful forces that provide for
continuity but not necessarily advancement. The potential to harmonize with powerful
forces but not necessarily for the benefit of the spirit.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A DEEPER EXPLORATION

399

GATE 56: THE WANDERER - STIMULATION

- Stability through movement. The perpetuation ofcontinuity through the linking ofshort term activityLine 6 - Caution

o ... l1le prudence, when linkage has been achieved, to honour its new commitments in order
to secure its footing. Honesty in expression. Living by one's word.
The profound unconscious wanderer, where external yearning for acceptance will
unconsciously release the exact energy that creates rejection. A difficult role, where the self
i unknown and not recognized with predictable results. Wandering throughout the life
from one expression to the next unable to find the stimulation that one could live by.
Line 5 - Attracting attention
Unusualness, innovation and sometimes genius as guarantees of eventually attracting
attention and support. Stimulation at its most innovative and unusual.
All too often the tendency to attract attention that is self-defeating in its effects. The
power of stimulation to provoke and disturb.
J)

Line 4 - Expediency
... The perfection of the superficial personality, that can mask, when essential, its true
feelings to secure protection. The gift for stimulation as a role and for protection.
\l Expedient behavior whose price is a constant stressful alertness and nervous anxiety in
fear of losing what has been gained. The role as reality. The fear of silence and of being
uncovered.
Line 3 - Alienation
Determined self-sufficiency.
A will and egoism that often proves overbearing and guarantees continued isolation.
Here, this is acceptable given the Sun's intrinsic vitality. The drive to control and be the
focus of expression.
\l The reversed aesthetic that offends others, ensures isolation, and eliminates support. The
drive to control the expression at the expense of stimulation.

o ...
c;;.

Line 2 - Linkage
1<';1 ... Isolated genius that will eventually find continuity through recognition and support. A genius

J)

for stimulating expression that will take time to mature and will need others to recognize it.
\l A superficiality which collapses under recognition and is eventually forced to move on. A
gift for communicating but not enough depth.

J)

....

d'

practical ideas that have value.
\l The ego drive to make an impression that will misuse energy in trivial pursuits. The drive
to stimulate that will express any idea, no matter how trivial.

Line 1 - Quality

1hc practical sense that even short term activities should be of value. Expression of

400

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 57: THE GENTLE· INTUITIVE CLARITY

-The extraordinary power of clarity Line 6 - Utilization

W ... The acceptance that clarity is a double-edged sword. There are situations where

(f

understanding cannot lead to rectification. Here, Uranus' innovative quality can generally
make the best out of an otherwise difficult but rarely permanent situation. Where there
is no answer, only the possibilities of the intuition can make the best out of a difficult
situation.
V When clarity points to a problem one is unable because of circumstances to solve, a
tendency to anger and frustration that provokes inevitably futile action. The possibility
that when the intuition cannot solve a problem, a tendency to frustration and anger.
Line 5 - Progression

'¥! ... The natural ability to establish new forms while maintaining the powers of reevaluation
:D

and reexamination. This provides the clarity to examine the data and assess the process.
The possible intuitive gift for evaluation.
V The tendency to keep on keeping on, that can end up as a misguided missile. When in
action, the intuition may become overwhelmed and unable to assess and evaluate its
progress.

fj.

... The mastery of relationships that through clarity can maximize productivity while the

Line 4 - The director

(f

sensitivity to interrelationships will ensure harmony. The possible intuitive clarity to
master relationships.
V A tendency given this position to be dictatorial rather than directorial. With the gift of
clarity to master relationships, the possibility of being intuitively dictatorial.
Line 3 - Acuteness
... The perfected intelligence, where clarity eliminates doubt and ensures manifestation. The
possibility of perfected intuition. No polarity.
V No planet in detriment.

:D

:D

Line 2 - Cleansing
The clarity to establishproper values and ideals must be accompanied by resolute determination
to maintain them.
... Perfected cleansing through inner realization. The possibility for proper values and ideals
through intuition.
V A superficial cleansing that tends to hide the dirt underneath the carpet. The possibility
that the depth of the intuition will be treated superficially.
Line 1 - Confusion
... The gift of penetrating to the inner meaning that ensures timely action. The possibility of
the intuition penetrating to the inner meaning.
V The Moon in detriment, where feelings are no substitute for clarity and can lead to
indecision. The possibility that confusion will overpower the intuition.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS,

A DEEPER EXPLORATION

---------

401

GATE 58: THE JOYOUS - VITALITY

- Stimulation is the key to joyLine 6 - Carried away
J)

.A. The tendency to practicality that while thoroughly enjoying external stimulation has the
instinct to draw back when its independent integrity is threatened. 1he energy to fuel
independent integrity that will maintain its identity in times of stimulation.
\} When its basic intelligence is effectively stimulated, its natural desire for attunement will
lead it to identity so strongly with the stimulation that it is at risk of losing its identity.
The energy which fuels loss ofidentity in times of stimulation.
Line 5 - Defense

J)

.A. The natural and practical instinct to protect oneself regardless of temptations. The fuel
for self-defense regardless of stimulations.

o \} The assumption that the best defense is a good offense, that might allow strength of
character to enjoy questionable stimulus without succumbing to it. The energy for
aliveness which forsakes self-defense and will embrace questionable stimulations.
Line 4 - Focusing
A natural specialization that when confronted with a multiplicity of stimulations will
have no inner difficulty in focusing on the appropriate influence. The energy to fuel
recognition ofwhich stimulation is ofvalue.
An impressionability that becomes confused when confronted with a multiplicity of
stimulations and in trying to accommodate all of it, becomes unstable. Energy which
becomes unstable when overstimulated.
Line 3 - Electricity
The individual whose electric vitality creates its own stimulation and is not dependent on
others. The energy to fuel independent stimulation.
The quality of fire is dependent on its fuel and subject to its influence, good or bad. The
energy for aliveness that is dependent on others for stimulation
Line 2 - Perversion
No polarity. 0 exaltation.
A genius for perverse stimulation that affiicts oneself and others by promoting degeneracy
and reducing joy to indulgence and decadence. The energy which fuels the drive for
perverse stimulation.

J)

Line 1 - Love oflife
.... The very stimulation of the world is the basis of an aesthetic appreciation of its beauty
and wonder. Alone or shared with others this profound inner realization is the key for a
joyous harmony with the process of being. The energy which fuels the love oflife.
\} The Moon has its phases, its moods, that will limit joy to an intermittent and cyclical
experience. A cyclical energy which intermittently fuels the love oflife.

40.=2=---

T_H_E_D_E_F_IN_ITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 59: DISPERSION - SEXUALITY
- The ability to break down barriers to achieve union -

Line 6 - The one night stand
The tendency based on personality or circumstances to accept only temporary unions that may
be otherwise impossible or dangerous to continue.
... The perfected relationship whether for a moment or an eternity. The power for intimacy
regardless of conditions.
'\l The basic drive to move on, that seeks impermanency as a matter of course and not in
response to circumstances. The drive for sexual and intimate diversity.
Line 5 - The femme fatale or Casanova
The power to use love to break down any barrier. Given the Sun's 'lightness' there is no
negative connotation inherent in this description. The power of sexuality to attract others.
Uranus in detriment, where the negative potential of this power becomes evident. The
Gigolo, the adventuress. The power of sexuality expressed as sexual power.
Line 4 - Brotherhood/sisterhood
... The dropping of barriers to union to establish a universal union. The power derived from
non-sexual intimacy.
'\l An intellectual understanding that is rarely put into action. Where the idea cannot
restrain the sex drive.
Line 3 - Openness
Saturn exalted, where the search for identity and security can only be achieved through the
dropping of barriers, in order to define oneself through union. Where one is empowered
through union and intimacy with others.
Where openness is transformed into promiscuity and its attendant problems. Where the
drive for empowerment, through union and intimacy, can lead to promiscuity.
Line 2 - Shyness
Self-imposed barriers.
A preferred and natural separateness that protects against the inevitable instability
engendered by union. The restriction of the sex drive to maintain separateness.
A calculated shyness, rooted in deep psychological barriers, that even in dynamic individuals
will always restrict interaction. Infertility, rooted psychologically or biologically, that
conditions the drive for separateness.
Line 1 - The preemptive strike

o ... The authority and vitality that in understanding purpose and direction can recognize and
!f

eliminate barriers before they become impregnable. The power offertility to impregnate.
'\l In this position, the ability and intelligence to recognize, but a deep indecisiveness about
how and when to act. The potential of fertility limited by uncertainty.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A DEEPER EXPLORATION

403

GATE 60: LIMITATION - ACCEPTANCE

- The acceptance oflimitation is the first step in transcendenceLine 6 - Rigidity

Itf ... The intuitive intellect to recognize when absolute rigidity is essential but with innovative
If

applications to lessen its severity. A fixed energy that is unusual in its capacity for restraint.
'\l The dogmatic, principled and carefully reasoned understanding that is uncompromising
in its severity and often coldly brutal in operation. An uncompromising and severe
acceptance of restraint. So uncompromising that the restraint may become unbearable
and lead to chronic depression.
Line 5 - Leadership
The awareness that the destruction of the old limitations simply creates new ones. This
results in behavioral patterns that demonstrate this understanding through actions and
enhances leadership potential. The energy to handle a lifelong process of dealing with
limitations.
Where the natural desire for expansion, when limitations are essential, creates confusion
from the top. Expansive energy that cannot handle limitations.
Line 4 - Resourcefulness
... The reasoned and intelligent maximization of potential within limitations. The
maximization of potential within limitation.
'\l A tendency in times of limitation to seek the inner meaning of the restriction rather
than using its gifts to find a harmonic application within the limitation. The former leads
to withdrawal and the latter to transcendence. The energy to know rather than accept
limitation at the expense of possible mutation, leading to depression.
Line 3 - Conservatism
Enlightened self-interest, that naturally handles restrictions and limitations ensuring
identity and security. The energy to maintain identity and security despite limitations.
Ego gratifYing self-interest that ignores limitations and suffers predictably. Energy which
ignores limitations and pays the price.
Line 2 - Decisiveness
The understanding of the natme of limitation, to accept its restraints when necessary and
thus be able to take advantage of opportunities when they arise. Energy which can adapt to
restraint.
An adaptation to restraint that becomes habitual and maintains the nature of the
limitation even when it no longer exists. The energy for adaptation that can get stuck
without eventual mutation.
Line 1 - Acceptance
... The ability to maintain inner harmony when confronted by external limitations. Harmonic
energy that can deal with external limitations.
'\l 1he drive for diversity, that when limited can become restless and agitated. Restless
energy when confronted with external limitations.

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN 404
-=-..:._-------

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 61: INNER TRUTH - MYSTERY
- The awareness of universal underlying principles -

Line 6 - Appeal
The profound attunement to the collectivity that can lure the public to a truth. Inspiration
that can bring clarity to the collective.
A reliance on shop-worn cliches and slogans that may be new in their level of energy but
inevitably fall on deaf ears. The delusion that inspiration can bring clarity to the collective.
Line 5 - Influence
The enlightened Father figure whose recognized wisdom and powerful assertion can mold a
generation by its influence. The pressure to know that may result in influence and wisdom.
A tendency in power to want to enforce compliance to ensure lasting influence. The
pressure in knowing to resent challenges and demand acceptance.
Line 4 - Research
The capacity of concentration to explore the depths of inner truth and maximize its
application to fundamental principles. The pressure to know the fundamental principles.
Where the tendency to expansion and integration leads to involving others in the research
and may end in a diversity of confusing applications. The illusion that collaboration will
enhance inspiration.
Line 3 - Interdependence
It is exceedingly difficultfor truth to stand alone.
J) • The ability to establish relationships for the actualization of truths, and through their
nurturing and protective power to ensure a stable environment in which they can continue
to grow. The pressure to know enhanced through collaboration.
(J' \l With an abundance of energy and in possession of a truth, the tendency to leave others
behind or be crushed by their resistance. Impatience with others and the forsaking of
relationships.
Line 2 - Natural brilliance
The Moon exalted, and so gifted by this position a far-reaching, a nourishing influence,
free of guile and powerfully attractive. A gift for inspiration that is both attractive and
beneficial to others.
(J' \l That in early recognition of its influence becomes ego obsessed with maximizing its
effects. A delusion that any inspiration deserves recognition.
J)

•

Line 1 - Occult knowledge
A natural psychic awareness that empowers principles of universalization. The pressure
to know the mysteries through esoterics.
\l Where a reliance on secret knowledge increasingly demands ascetic withdrawal and leads
eventually to obscurity. Where the pressure to know the mysteries can be so strong that
one can be eventually incapable of handling exoteric realities.

'¥ •
c;.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LiNE DESCRIPTIONS, A

DEEPER EXPLORATION

GATE 62: THE PREPONDERANCE OF THE SMALL - DETAILS

- Caution, patience and detail produce excellence out oflimitation Line 6 - Self-discipline
1) • A penny saved is a penny earned. Detail as the path to material success. The understanding
that material success depends on the expression of detail.
i \J The skills but not the discipline to succeed. The gift for, but not the discipline, to do the
necessary detail work to succeed.

:D
'¥

Line 5 - Metamorphosis
When excellence is achieved, action is necessary.
• The reaching out to others to share, symbolized by the Moon's phases as it moves from
darkness to eventually sharing fully its light. The understanding that only when the
details are complete can action or expression be initiated.
\J A tendency in metamorphosis to seek acclaim through dramatic presentation. When the
details are organized, the need for attention demands expression.

Line 4 - Asceticism
The perfected ascetic withdrawal in the pursuit of harmony and simplicity, where outside
dangers do not exist, and there is time to pursue inner meaning in detail. Detail that can
only be expressed after periods of isolation and reflection.
W \J The urge to take action against established values that when restrained by circumstances,
leads to withdrawal that waits for opportunity. Where the detail is organized, isolation
as a strategy waiting for the right opportunity for expression.
~

•

Line 3 - Discovery
A genius for the unusual. The ability to discover valuable information in detail work
and to find innovative applications for this knowledge. The unusual gift of finding and
expressing valuable details.
\J A dissatisfaction with the monotony of detail work, where what is missed may be of great
importance and value. The expression of dissatisfaction and boredom in detail work.

W•
~

Line 2 - Restraint
The innate restrictiveness and discipline to comply with and exalt restraint. The discipline
necessary for detail work.
\J The intellect stymied by severe restraints tends to anxiety and restlessness. The expression
of anxiety and restlessness when faced with detail work.

1) •

i

Line 1 - Routine
'The ability to transcend the boredom of routine through a rich and daring fantasy life.

The ability to organize the detail through fantasy.
Rebellion and its enormous waste of energy. The need for expression which ignores the
details.

406

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

GATE 63: AFTER COMPLETION - DOUBT

- In the spiral oflife, all ends are beginningsLine 6 - Nostalgia
The good sense to avoid turning the previous struggle into an obsession. The logic of
leaving old doubts behind.
Revolutionary nostalgia. Illogic and the potential obsession with old suspicions and doubt.
Line 5 - Affirmation
The authority and sincerity of purpose to pursue the same values in the new beginning
that had allowed it to transcend the old. The understanding that doubts are necessary
and ofvalue.
A tendency in triumph to pay lip service to such values, and given such leadership, these
values will be reduced to nothing more than empty rituals. Doubting one's very process
despite understanding.
Line 4 - Memory

!f ... The detailed accounting of the achievement process whose information base can prepare

0'

1)

v

v

a new order for the future. The pressure to explore the doubt in detail as a foundation for
eventual formulizing.
A willingness to forget in the glow of victory, with a possible price to be paid later. The
pressure and risk to forget the details when the doubts have been answered.
Line 3 - Continuance
The dedication to the new beginning that insists on maintaining its achieved principles
despite having to interact with those who have not attained such a state. Doubts that one
can maintain one's principles when interacting with others.
Success at any price. The pressure to eliminate the doubt at any cost.
Line 2 - Structuring
The establishing of a large framework through which achievement can be expanded
and shared; compensating others for their contributions while maintaining control of
direction. The pressure to share one's doubts with others while still maintaining control.
Instability in achievement that when in positions of authority leads to arrogance and the
desire to keep others away from the center of power. Doubts in achievement that can lead
to suspicion of others.

0'

v

Line 1 - Composure
The quality of personality where achievement is accepted with equanimity and where
continued development is allowed to take its natural course. Acceptance of achievement
but doubt whether continued development will take place.
The tendency in achievement to immediately seek new goals at the risk of destabilizing
what has already been accomplished. The pressure in achievement to still doubt one's
capacities and to immediately seek new goals.

SECTION TEN: HEXAGRAM LINE DESCRIPTIONS, A DEEPER EXPLORA_T_'_O_N

-----'-4-"'-'-07

GATE 64: BEFORE COMPLETION - CONFUSION

- Transition, like birth, requires a determined strength for the passage through Line 6 - Victory
... The mental a suredness, that knew that victory was inevitable, thus making triumph sweet
but not reason for excess. The mental gift of enjoying the confusion and its diversity of
data.
\l Like the story of the Trojan Horse, it can be dangerous to get carried away in celebration,
least one looses vigilance and perspective. With all the diversity of data, it is easy to lose
perspective.
~

11-

Line 5 - Promise
... The values promised in any new order are demonstrated through harmonic interactions
with others. This strengthens the justification for the struggle. Confusion over which
values and relationships can bring harmony.
\l A tendency in trying to justify the struggle by focusing exclusively on the failure of the old
order that cannot demonstrate the quality of the new. Focusing on the past confusions
about values and relationships.
Line 4 - Conviction

J)

... Symbolized by its phases, the Moon is assured of transition convinced by its very process

(J'

that it will triumph. The assuredness that confusion is a process that results in realization.
\l Where force and energy alone cannot overcome doubt. Where the confusion is so
energized, assuredness brings no relief.

Line 3 - Overextension
1) ... The wisdom to recognize when one has not the necessary resources to complete transition.
Such timely awareness may give it a chance to seek assistance. The wisdom to accept
confusion as a temporary state, that will be resolved in time or through others.
J) \l The risk of a superficially confident personality that when transition collapses, there is no
one to turn to. Overconfidence that the Fates will be kind on demand.
Line 2 - Qualification
~

J)

... An inner development which recognizes what qualities are essential for transcendence
and the awareness that without them, action will fail. Inner development that can end
the confusion over what makes sense.
\l Constantly in action, it wastes the very qualities and resources that it will need. Getting
lost in the confusion and burdening the psyche.
Line 1 - Conditions

~

d'

... In penetrating to the center, the understanding that instills the necessary harmony to
survive disorder. Amongst the confusion, the difficulty in finding the point.
\l The powerful temptation when having transition in sight, to hasty action. An urge to act
when you think you have made sense of the confusion.

408

THE DEFINITIVE BOOK OF HUMAN DESIGN -

"EVERY

TI MEl

TEACH

ALWAYS

STRUCK

BY

AT

THE

ANY

LEVEL

SAME

THING.

OF

THE SCIENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION

TH IS

KNOWLEDGE,

I'M

WITHOUT

STRATEGY

AND

AUTHORITY, THERE'S NOTHING IN THIS LIFE. THERE'S NOTHING BUT
HOMOGENIZATION,

CONFUSION,

AND

DISTORTION.

As

LONG AS

THE

MIND IS INVOLVED THERE'S NO WAY OUT. THERE ISN'T. AS LONG AS
THE MIND IS CONTROLLING YOUR LIFE THERE IS ABSOLUTELY NOTHING
YOU

CAN

DO.

YOU'RE

LOST.

YOU'RE JUST

LOST.

AND

YOU

END

UP

SUFFERING DEEPLY. IT'S SO SIMPLE.
THIS

IS

THE

WHOLE

THING.

IT'S

THE

DECONDITIONING.

IT'S

THE

DECONDITIONING AWAY FROM HOMOGENIZATION TO DIFFERENTIATION.
IT'S ABOUT BEING ABLE TO ACCEPT A
POSSIBILITY,

IT'S

NOT A

POSSIBILITY, AND IT'S ONLY A

PROBABILITY;

A

POSSIBILITY THAT

ALONG

THIS WAY THERE ARE THOSE WITH WHOM YOU CAN COMMUNE WITH IN
AN EXTRAORDINARY WAY. IT'S WHAT WE'RE HERE FOR.

I SO ENJOYED BEING ABLE TEACH AT A VERY HIGH INTELLECTUAL LEVEL,
TO BE ABLE TO DEAL WITH TH INGS THAT ARE ESSENTIAL TRUTHS ABOUT
THE NATURE OF BEING AND THE NATURE OF LIFE. IT'S A PRIVILEGE,
IT'S A GREAT PRIVILEGE. AND THAT IT'S MORE THAN JUST CHIT CHAT,
BECAUSE I AM A 5; IT IS PRACTICAL. BYE FOR NOW." -

RA URU Hu

